Neuroscience Research 129 (2018) 2–7 

**==> picture [61 x 66] intentionally omitted <==**

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect 

~~Neuroscience Research~~ jo ur nal home p age: www.elsevier.com/locate/neures 

**==> picture [58 x 73] intentionally omitted <==**

## Review article 

## Prefrontal–hippocampal interactions for spatial navigation Hiroshi T. Ito 

**==> picture [60 x 26] intentionally omitted <==**

Max Planck Institute for Brain Research, Max-von-Laue Str. 4, 60438 Frankfurt am Main, Germany 

|a<br> r  t<br> i c  l e <br>i  n  f  o<br>Article<br> history:<br>Received<br> 15<br> March<br> 2017<br>Received<br> in<br> revised<br> form<br> 26<br> April<br> 2017<br>Accepted<br> 28<br> April<br> 2017<br>Available<br> online<br> 3<br> May<br> 2017<br>Keywords:<br>Hippocampus<br>Prefrontal<br> cortex<br>Spatial<br> navigation|a<br> b<br> s<br> t  r  a<br> c  t|
|---|---|
||Animals<br> have  the ability<br> to navigate<br> to a  desired  location<br> by  making<br> use  of  information<br> about  environ-<br>mental<br> landmarks<br> and  their  own  movements.<br> While<br> decades<br> of neuroscience<br> research<br> have identifed<br>neurons<br> in the hippocampus<br> and  parahippocampal<br> structures<br> that  represent<br> an  animal’s<br> position<br> in<br>space,<br> it  is still  largely<br> unclear<br> how  an  animal  can  choose<br> the  next  movement<br> direction<br> to<br> reach<br> a desired<br>goal.  As the  goal  destination<br> is typically<br> located  somewhere<br> outside<br> of  the range  of sensory<br> perception,<br>the<br> animal<br> is required<br> to<br> rely<br> on  the  internal<br> metric  of space  to estimate<br> the  direction<br> and  distance<br>of<br> the destination<br> to  plan a next  action.  Therefore,<br> the hippocampal<br> spatial  map  should<br> interact<br> with<br>action-planning<br> systems<br> in  other  cortical<br> regions.<br> In  accordance<br> with  this  idea,  several  recent  studies<br>have<br> indicated<br> the  importance<br> of functional<br> interactions<br> between<br> the  hippocampus<br> and  the<br> prefrontal<br>cortex<br> for<br> goal-directed<br> navigation.<br> In this  paper,  I will  review<br> these  studies<br> and discuss<br> how<br> an  animal<br>can  estimate<br> its future  positions<br> correspond<br> to  a next  movement.<br> Investigation<br> of  the  navigation<br> problem<br>may<br> further<br> provide<br> general<br> insights<br> into  internal<br> models<br> of  the  brain  for  action  planning.<br>© 2017  Elsevier<br> Ireland<br> Ltd and Japan<br> Neuroscience<br> Society.<br> All  rights<br> reserved.|



## **Contents** 

|1.|Navigation<br> behavior<br> of  animals  . . .  . . . .  . .|.  . . . .  .  . . .  . . . .|. . . . . . .  .  . . . . . . .  . . . . . .  .  .  .  . . . .  . . .  . . . .  .  .  .  . . .  . .  .  . . . .  .  . .  .  . . .  .  . . .  . . .  . . .  . . . .  .  . .  .  .  . . .  .  .|. . . . .  .|. . .  .|.|. .  . .  . . .  .|.|. 2|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|2.|Hippocampus<br> for spatial  navigation<br> . .  .  .|. .  . . . .  .  .  . .  .  . .|.  . .  . .  . . .  .  .  . .  . . .  . .  .  .  . . .  .  .  . .  . . . .  . .  .  . . .  . .  .  . . . . . .  .  . . . .  .  . .  .  . . .  .  . . .  . .  . . . . . .  .  .  . . . . . . .  .<br>|.  .  .  . . .|. . .  .|.|. . . . . . .  .|.|. 3|
||2.1.<br>Spatial-representation<br> system<br> in|the  brain  .  .|. . . .  . . .  .  . . . . . .  .  .  . . . . .  .  .  . .  . . . .  . . .  . . .  . .  .  .  . . .  . . .  . .  . . .  . . . . . . . . . .  .  . . .  . . . .  .  . . . .  .  . . . .  .|. .  .  . . .|. . .  .|.|.  . .  . . . . .|.<br>|. 3|
||2.2.<br>Navigation<br> problem<br> and prospective<br> activity<br>||in place  cells  . . .  . . . .  .  . . . . . .  . .  .  . . . .  . . . . . . .  . .  .  . . .  . . . . . . .  .  . .  . . . .  . . . .  . . . . .  .  . . . .  .  .|. . .  .  . .|. . .  .|.|.  .  .  .  . .  .  .<br>|.|. 3|
|3.|Wider<br> circuits<br> for  spatial  navigation<br> . . .  .|. . .  .  . . .  . . .  .  . .|.  . . . .  .  . . . . . .  .  . . . . .  . . . .  . . . . . .  . . .  . . . . .  . . . . .  . . .  . . . . .  . . . .  . . . .  . . . . . . .  .  . .  . . . . .  .  .  .  . . .  .|. . . . .  .|. . .  .|.|.  . . .  . .  . .|.|. 4|
||3.1.<br>Prefrontal<br> cortex<br> and  navigation<br>|. . .  . . . . . . .  . . .|. . . .  .  . . . .  . . .  . . . .  . . .  .  .  . .  .  . . . . . . .  . . . . .  . . . . . . . .  . . . . . .  .  . . . . .  .  .  .  . . .  . . . . .  .  . . . . . . . . .  .  .|. .  . .  .  .|. .  .  .|.|. . .  .  . .  .  .|.|. 4|
||3.2.<br>Prefrontal-hippocampal<br> interactions<br> . .  .  . . . . .||. .  . . . . . . .  . . . .  .  . .  . . . .  .  . .  .  .  . .  . . .  .  . . . . . .  . . .  . . . . . . .  . . . . .  . .  .  . . . .  . . .  .  . . . .  . . . .  .  . . . . .  .  .|. . . . . .|. .  .  .|.|. .  .  .  .  . .  .|.|.  5|
|4.|Conclusions<br> . . . .  .  . . . . .  . .  . . .  .  . . .  . . . .  . . .  . . . .|. . .  . .  . .  . . . . . .|. . . . .  . . . .  . . .  . . . . . .  .  . . . . . .  .  . .  . . . .  .  . . . . . .  . .  . . . . .  .  . .  . . . . . . . .  . . . . . . .  .  . . . .  . . . . . . . .  .  .|.  . . . . .|. . . .<br>|.|. .  .  .  .  . .  .|.|. 6|
||Acknowledgements<br> .  .  . . . .  .  . . . .  . . . . . . . . . .|. . . .  . . .  .  .  . .  . .|. .  .  . . . . . . .  . . . . . . .  . . .  . . . . . . .  . . . . . . .  .  . . . . . .  .  . . . . .  . . .  . . .  . . . . .  . . .  . . . .  .  . .  . . .  .  . . . . . . .|. . .  .  .  .|.  . . .|.<br>|. .  . .  . . . .|.|.  6|
||References<br> . . . .  . .  . . . . . . . .  .  . . .  . . . .  . . .  . .  . .  .  .|. . . . .  . . .  .  . . . .|.  . .  .  .  . .  .  . . .  .  . .  .  . . . .  .  . .  . . .  . . .  .  . . .  . .  . . . . . . .  .  .  . . . .  .  . .  . . .  . . .  . . . .  .  . . .  .  . .  .  . . .  .  . .  .  .  .  . .|.  . . . . .<br>|. . .  .|.|.  .  .  . .  .  .  .|.|.  6|



## **1. Navigation behavior of animals** 

pigeons or bees, appear to use a special sensory system for the Earth’s magnetic field or for sunlight polarization to estimate their home location (Wehner, 1984; Lohmann et al., 2008; Mehlhorn and Rehkamper, 2009). Other animals, such as desert ants, are good at using a navigation strategy called path integration, in which the animal accumulates its movement vectors from the beginning of the navigation so that the resultant vector should represent the direction and distance of the nest location from the animal’s current position (Wehner and Wehner, 1986; Muller and Wehner, 1988; Wittlinger et al., 2006). These navigation strategies do not impose a large demand of memory, providing an efficient strategy for navigation when returning home. However, the navigation strategies described above are not necessarily suitable when an animal is required to visit multiple 

Spatial navigation is one of the most fundamental abilities of animals. All animals are required to explore from one location to another for survival. However, their navigation strategies are not necessarily the same – different animal species appear to develop their own strategy that is suitable for their living purpose, their environment, and functional features of their nervous system. For example, many animals, including insects, are known to have the ability to return to the nest location after a long period of exploration in their environment. Some animals, such as sea turtles, 

E-mail address: hiroshi.ito@brain.mpg.de https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neures.2017.04.016 0168-0102/© 2017 Elsevier Ireland Ltd and Japan Neuroscience Society. All rights reserved. 

0168-0102/© 

H.T. Ito / Neuroscience Research 129 (2018) 2–7 

3 

destinations in the environment. In our daily life, it is often necessary to plan a route so that we can visit multiple destinations with a minimum travel distance. While one potential strategy may be to memorize all possible routes between spatial landmarks in the environment, this exhaustive strategy will require a huge capacity of memory. Furthermore, in such a strategy, animals will never be able to find a novel shortcut route because route planning is based on prior experiences. Here, map-based navigation provides a versatile strategy for navigation. The main idea of this navigation strategy is that the brain does not need to memorize individual routes, but instead, the brain makes direct use of a geometric structure of the environment, or a map, so that an appropriate route can be planned for each start–goal combination. While this strategy requires the brain to store the information about positional relationships in the environment, once it is completed, it allows the brain to estimate the direction and distance between any two locations. The strategy will further enable an animal to discover a novel shortcut route based on geometric relationships of positions, even if the animal has never experienced such routes before. 

While humans appear to use a map-based navigation strategy by mentally visualizing a geometric structure of the environment during the route-planning process, are there any animals that can perform a similar map-based navigation? Edward Tolman has performed a series of behavioral experiments that support the idea that rats have the ability to perform map-based navigation (Tolman, 1948). For example, rats can find a novel shortcut route to a destination (Tolman et al., 1946) and can correctly estimate the direction and distance of a destination from different start positions (Morris, 1981; Eichenbaum et al., 1990) . These behavioral studies led to investigations of the rat nervous system in an effort to search for neural representations of the environmental geometry. 

## **2. Hippocampus for spatial navigation** 2.1. Spatial-representation system in the brain 

nal representations for each environment, which may be important to prevent overlaps of different experiences or memories. How can place cells be formed in the brain? A particular spatial position may be determined by local landmarks, such as visual, tactile or olfactory sensory cues, but may also be estimated by idiothetic motion-related or proprioceptive cues. Experimental evidence suggests that both of these mechanisms are used to form place cells (Poucet et al., 2000). For example, while firing fields of place cells are influenced by the shift of sensory-cue locations, partial removal of cues can be compensated by the system so that place cells maintain the same firing fields (O’Keefe and Conway, 1978). The firing fields of place cells do not change in darkness (Quirk et al., 1990; Markus et al., 1994; McNaughton et al., 1996), and furthermore, place cells can be formed even if animals were blinded at a young age (Save et al., 1998), suggesting the importance of idiothetic information for the formation of location-specific firing in place cells. These studies indicate the necessity for an internal metric system to estimate a direction and distance relative to a particular location based on the animal’s own movement. In accordance with this idea, grid cells in the medial entorhinal cortex, an upstream structure of the hippocampus, have multiple firing fields with equal-distance spacing in particular directions, which forms a metric system for spatial distance and direction (Hafting et al., 2005; Moser et al., 2014). A recent computational study has demonstrated that a population of grid cells, with different spacing sizes and spatial phases, are sufficient to extract information about the distance and direction between two positions (Stemmler et al., 2015). Furthermore, the existence of head-direction cells and speed cells in the medial entorhinal cortex (Sargolini et al., 2006; Kropff et al., 2015) supports the idea that this brain region implements integration of the animal’s own running speed and direction to estimate the traveled distance and the direction after a move. Altogether, evidence suggests that the hippocampus and parahippocampal regions create an internal metric of space to represent spatial positions and their relationships in the environment. 

## 2.2. Navigation problem and prospective activity in place cells 

While behavioral evidence suggests that rats can perform map-based navigation, how does the brain represent a geometric structure of the environment? One of the biggest breakthroughs was made by John O’Keefe and colleagues. They discovered neurons in the hippocampus called place cells that fire whenever an animal visits a particular location in space (O’Keefe and Dostrovsky, 1971). This led to the idea that place cells are the key elements of an internal map, also known as a cognitive map, in the brain (O’Keefe and Nadel, 1978). Place cells have several features distinct from neurons that were discovered prior to that time. First, while place cells exhibit a selective tuning to external features in the environment, these neurons were found in the hippocampus, a higher cortical region that is multiple synapses away from the peripheral sensory organs (e.g. Felleman and Van Essen, 1991). Second, while neurons in other brain areas sometimes exhibit activity preferences to the stimulus location, the spatial tuning of these neurons is typically based on a self-centered, egocentric coordinate, for example, bound to an animal’s own eye or body position (Hubel and Wiesel, 1959; Andersen et al., 1985; Brotchie et al., 1995). The activity tuning of place cells is, in contrast, based on an allocentric coordinate that is bound to the external environment, which implies a requirement for additional computation to transform sensory inputs from an egocentric to an allocentric representation. Finally, a pair of place cells that share the place fields in one environment do not necessarily represent the same location in another environment (Muller and Kubie, 1987), suggesting that this representation is different from a ‘map’ observed in sensory cortices in which a pair of neurons maintain the same feature relationships across different stimuli. The hippocampus seems to create multiple independent orthogo- 

Significant progress has been made in understanding the brain’s spatial representation system. Place cells and grid cells have been discovered in the human hippocampus and entorhinal cortex (Ekstrom et al., 2003; Jacobs et al., 2013), and damage in these structures has been shown to impair the ability for spatial navigation in both rats and humans (Morris et al., 1982; Bohbot et al., 1998; Spiers et al., 2001; Burgess et al., 2002; Steffenach et al., 2005). Place cells and grid cells constitute key elements for spatial navigation by representing an animal’s instantaneous position in the environment (Moser et al., 2008). However, the information provided by these cells is not sufficient for goal-directed navigation. For an animal to plan a route to a destination, it is necessary for the animal to estimate its future state in space following a planned movement. This requires the brain to have relationships between the next movement and future positions. Several studies have reported place-cell activity that appears to reflect such relationships, indicating a possibility that the animal’s future spatial state is represented in the hippocampus. 

One of the potential mechanisms of future representation in the hippocampus is based on the temporal coding of spatial positions in place cells. Place cells are known to exhibit a systematic spike-phase shift relative to the local hippocampal theta rhythm (8–11 Hz) as the animal passes through the firing field of the cell – a phenomenon called phase precession (O’Keefe and Recce, 1993) (Fig. 1A). This indicates that place cells fire in accordance with the distance to their field center before an animal reaches there, implying the place-cell’s representation of an animal’s expected future position. David Redish and colleagues have tested this idea 

4 

H.T. Ito / Neuroscience Research 129 (2018) 2–7 

**==> picture [313 x 173] intentionally omitted <==**

**Fig. 1.** Prospective coding in place cells. (A) When an animal runs over the firing fields of place cells, spike timing relative to the local hippocampal theta rhythm is systematically shifted to earlier phase (phase precession), which results in the emergence of spike sequence across the population of place cells corresponding to the animal’s path. Firing fields and spikes are differently colored for each place cell. (B) When an animal is required to choose a route on a T-maze task, place cells change their firing rates depending on the next trajectory choice. Firing rates of the place cell are color-coded. (C) When an animal is not actively exploring the environment during a goal-directed navigation task, place cells sometimes exhibit a brief spike sequence across the population, which often represents the animal’s future path toward the goal. 

in goal-directed navigation tasks and found that spatial positions represented by phase precession can be extended to an animal’s upcoming path toward the goal (Gupta et al., 2012; Johnson and Redish, 2007; Wikenheiser and Redish, 2015). While phase precession has been mostly examined in a maze with one-dimensional tracks, Huxter et al. (2008) investigated the behavioral correlates of phase precession in a two-dimensional open-field arena, and found that phase precession has a strong correlation with the animal’s ongoing heading direction relative to the center of the place fields. This result implies that phase precession reflects an animal’s look-ahead positions, which may be useful for route planning but not necessarily an animal’s future route per se. Climer et al. (2013) also found that the phase precession of grid cells persists even if an animal only passes the edge of the firing fields without visiting the center of the fields in a two-dimensional arena, suggesting that phase precession is not likely a general mechanism to represent an animal’s future position. 

Wood et al. (2000) and Frank et al. (2000) discovered that the modulation of the activity of place cells is dependent on the animal’s trajectory in the maze – another plausible mechanism for prospective coding in the hippocampus. When the animal is required to choose one of the two routes at a T-junction of a maze, place cells change their firing rates before the decision point of the maze depending on an animal’s next choice of trajectory, either a rightor left-oriented route (Fig. 1B). While the change of firing rates depends not only on the future trajectory, but also on the previous trajectory (Ferbinteanu and Shapiro, 2003), recent studies have demonstrated that an animal’s prospective and retrospective route choices can be independently decoded from the population activity of place cells in the hippocampal CA1 (Catanese et al., 2014; Ito et al., 2015). 

Finally, several lines of evidence suggest that an animal’s future trajectory is represented in brief spike sequences generated among the population of place cells. While the activity of place cells depends primarily on an animal’s position during active exploration in space, these neurons represent different features when an animal is in a rest or sleep state (Buzsaki, 2015). During such states, place cells are mostly silent but occasionally generate brief spike sequences (∼100 ms) across the population, which sometimes correspond to the activity sequence during prior exploration of a particular trajectory in the environment. Such brief trajectory sequences generated by place cells are often called replay events (Lee and Wilson, 2002; Foster and Wilson, 2006). Replay 

events have been considered as a potential neural mechanism of memory consolidation whereby the information in the hippocampus that is obtained during active exploration of the environment is transferred to neocortical circuits (Girardeau et al., 2009; Carr et al., 2011). Pfeiffer and Foster (2013) examined the place-cell activity when an animal was performing a goal-directed navigation task and found that brief trajectory sequences of place cells are often correlated with an animal’s next trajectories in a maze (Fig. 1C). This result indicates that the emergence of place-cell sequences is not necessarily random, but rather reflects behavioral demands needed to determine a successive trajectory. To test their behavioral relevance, Jadhav et al. (2012) attempted to disrupt replay events when the animal was engaged in a navigation task. Their approach is based on the observation that replay events are usually accompanied by a characteristic pattern of local field potentials in the hippocampal CA1 region, called sharp-wave/ripple (SPW-R), which is composed of a large voltage deflection for 40–100 ms (sharp-wave) together with high-frequency oscillations (150–250 Hz; ripple) (Buzsaki, 2015). Jadhav et al. (2012) demonstrated that the electrical stimulation in the hippocampus at the onset of SPW-Rs, which disrupts their accompanying activity, resulted in incorrect route choices of the animal in a spatial working memory task, implying a key role for replay events in spatial navigation. 

A recent study of the bat hippocampus led to another important discovery. Sarel et al. (2017) recorded the activity of neurons in the hippocampal CA1 region when a bat was flying toward a fixed landing location and found that some CA1 neurons exhibited activity tuning in the direction or distance of the landing location. Such a vectorial representation of the goal is likely to play a key role for route planning, and it is of great interest to explore the existence of a similar activity in the hippocampus of other animals. 

## **3. Wider** 

## **3. Wider circuits for spatial navigation** 3.1. Prefrontal cortex and navigation 

While many studies have been focusing on the hippocampus and parahippocampal areas to search for neural correlates of map-based spatial navigation, some studies have suggested the importance of other brain regions, especially the prefrontal cortex, for spatial navigation. For example, a human patient with damage to the prefrontal cortex exhibits difficulty in spatial nav- 

damage to 

H.T. Ito / Neuroscience Research 129 (2018) 2–7 

5 

**==> picture [313 x 249] intentionally omitted <==**

**Fig. 2.** Anatomy of prefrontal-hippocampal interactions. Top: simplified scheme of anatomical connections between the medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC) and the hippocampal CA1. The mPFC has reciprocal connections with the thalamic nucleus reuniens (NR) that gives rise to inputs in the hippocampal CA1. The projection from NR to the ventral CA1 is stronger than that to the dorsal CA1. The hippocampal CA1, in turn, projects back to mPFC. This projection is primarily originated from the intermediate and ventral portions of CA1. Bottom: illustration of anatomical locations of mPFC, NR and CA1. 

igation (Ciaramelli, 2008). Notably, in contrast to the navigation deficits following damage to the hippocampus or parahippocampal areas, the patient can successfully navigate if the goal location is repeatedly reminded during the navigation, suggesting that the prefrontal cortex may be especially important for keeping the goal location in mind when determining the next movement (Spiers, 2008). 

In agreement with this clinical case, rats with lesions in the medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC) exhibit significant deficits in navigation tasks. Granon and Poucet (1995) tested the navigation ability of rats with mPFC lesions in a water-maze task. While these animals were able to navigate to a hidden platform from the experienced start positions, they had a problem navigating from newly added start positions, suggesting that mPFC is important for flexible route planning to a specific goal. Furthermore, other behavioral studies have demonstrated that inactivation of mPFC impaired performance in a delayed alternation task in which an animal is required to remember a previous goal location (Yoon et al., 2008; Rossi et al., 2012). Together, these behavioral studies suggest a key role of mPFC in goal representation. 

The importance of mPFC in goal representation was also confirmed in a recording study. Hok et al. (2005) designed a navigation task in which an animal was required to enter an unmarked reward-trigger zone to obtain pellets that were delivered at random locations in a maze. This allowed the authors to differentiate the influence of neural activity in relation to the goal locations and the reward locations. They found that a large proportion of neurons in mPFC exhibited increased activity around the reward-trigger zone, which indicates goal representation in mPFC neurons. 

## 3.2. Prefrontal-hippocampal interactions 

Many lines of evidence suggest that hippocampal place cells not only represent an animal’s current positions, but also reflect an animal’s subsequent route choice or future positions, as described in Section 2.2. How can the hippocampus represent such information 

about an animal’s future behaviors? One possibility is that prospective activity may be generated in the hippocampus to influence behavioral decisions implemented in other cortical areas. However, it has been reported that patients with damage in the hippocampus still have an excellent ability for route planning based on the spatial memory acquired before the damage (Teng and Squire, 1999; Rosenbaum et al., 2000), implying that the hippocampus is not necessarily essential for route decisions per se. Another possibility is that the prospective activity in the hippocampus is derived from other brain structures that provide inputs in the hippocampus. A plausible candidate is the prefrontal cortex. For instance, lesions of mPFC significantly impair the goal representation or the object-place conjunctive coding in place cells (Hok et al., 2013; Navawongse and Eichenbaum, 2013), suggesting that mPFC neurons have a significant impact on modulation of the place-cell activity. However, while neurons in the hippocampus are known to give rise to inputs in mPFC, there are no major return connections from mPFC to the hippocampus (Vertes et al., 2007), although a recent study has reported a sparse projection from the anterior cingulate cortex to the hippocampus in mice (Rajasethupathy et al., 2015). Many anatomical tracing studies have suggested that the thalamic nucleus reuniens (NR) plays a crucial role in the transfer of information from mPFC to the hippocampus (Herkenham, 1978; Wouterlood et al., 1990; Cassel et al., 2013), because of massive projections from mPFC to NR and from NR to the hippocampus (Fig. 2). In spite of the fact that NR inputs have a strong excitatory impact in CA1 that is almost comparable to CA3 inputs (Bertram and Zhang, 1999), the functional role of NR had not been explored much until recently. 

The NR is a midline thalamic nucleus that has reciprocal connections with mPFC and gives rise to inputs in CA1, but not in CA2, CA3 or DG regions of the hippocampus (Wouterlood et al., 1990; Hoover and Vertes, 2007; Cassel et al., 2013), constituting a prefrontal–thalamo–hippocampal circuit (Fig. 2). Recent studies have reported the importance of this circuit in several behavioral tasks. Hembrook and Mair demonstrated that lesions 

behavioral tasks. 

6 H.T. Ito / Neuroscience Research 129 (2018) 2–7 

of NR resulted in significant impairment in spatial working memory tasks (Hembrook and Mair, 2011; Hembrook et al., 2012). Xu and Sudhof (2013) described that the mPFC-NR-hippocampal circuit has a key role in determining specificity and generalization of contextual fear memories (Xu and Sudhof, 2013). These results suggest that the mPFC-NR-mediated circuit is crucial in behaviors that require task-specific use of spatial memory, which is consistent with the idea that the circuit is important for the modulation of hippocampal spatial information by the prefrontal cortex, a brain area that is known to be important for task-dependent strategy planning (Milner, 1982; Shallice, 1982; Burgess, 2000). Furthermore, Loureiro et al. (2012) demonstrated that NR is crucial for memory consolidation of spatial memory, suggesting a role for NR in mediating interactions between the hippocampus and neocortical circuits. To test the impact of NR for spatial navigation, Cholvin et al. (2013) designed a double-H maze task that required an animal to plan a route from a new start position to a fixed goal. The authors found that acute inactivation of NR neurons by the infusion of a GABAA receptor agonist, muscimol, resulted in a significant impairment in the task performance, suggesting a key role of NR in route planning process (Cholvin et al., 2013). What is the neural code in NR for spatial navigation? This question was explored in the study by Ito et al. (2015). The authors examined the circuit mechanism of trajectory-dependent coding in place cells in the hippocampus. When an animal was performing a continuous alternation task on a modified T-maze with return paths, firing rates but not positions of place cells changed depending on the next planned trajectory, as previously reported (Wood et al., 2000). Ito et al. (2015) found that neurons in NR and mPFC also exhibited rate changes on the central stem of the T-maze in a similar manner as neurons in the CA1 region. Furthermore, they demonstrated that the mPFC-NR inputs was essential for place cells to represent the next trajectory, because (i) trajectory-dependent firing was observed in place cells in CA1, but very little in CA3 that does not receive NR inputs, and (ii) lesions or optogenetic silencing of NR resulted in disruption of trajectory coding in CA1 place cells. Decoding analysis further revealed the necessity of the mPFC-NRCA1 circuit for future trajectory coding in place cells, suggesting a key role for the mPFC-NR-CA1 circuit in goal-directed navigation. The hippocampal CA1, in turn, gives rise to inputs in mPFC. This projection originates primarily from the intermediate and ventral portions of the CA1 region (Swanson, 1981; Ferino et al., 1987; Jay and Witter, 1991) (Fig. 2). Spellman et al. (2015) have shown that the hippocampal–mPFC circuit plays a crucial role in an animal’s performance of a delayed non-match to sample task on a T-maze, in which an animal is required to memorize a reward location to determine the next trajectory choice. The authors further dissected the task phase, in which the hippocampal–mPFC projection is essential for behavioral performance, and found that the projection is important at the time of reward-location encoding. The study suggests that mPFC likely plays a key role in the encoding of goal locations by making use of the hippocampal spatial map, and this information may in turn be used for planning of a successive 

## **Conclusions** 

While accumulating evidence suggests that the hippocampus and accompanying parahippocampal structures play a crucial role in constructing an internal spatial map in the brain, it is still poorly understood how such a cognitive map is used for action planning during navigation. The activity of place cells generally reflects an animal’s instantaneous position, but they also sometimes represent an animal’s future positions or trajectory choices. The emergence of such prospective activity appears to be mod- 

ulated by behavioral demands, implying that there is influence from other cortical regions involved in behavioral planning. Recent experimental evidence suggests that the information from the prefrontal cortex to the hippocampus is crucial for place cells to represent an animal’s next trajectory choice. Other studies have demonstrated that the information flow in the reverse direction, from the hippocampus to the prefrontal cortex, plays a key role for goal-location encoding in neurons in the prefrontal cortex. Each of these structures appears to have a distinct and pivotal role for goal-directed navigation, and their functional coordination is likely to be crucial for the planning of the next movement direction toward the goal. Furthermore, as a recent study in humans has suggested that the hippocampal–entorhinal system is used for the representation of not only physical space but also conceptual-thought space (Constantinescu et al., 2016), investigation of prefrontal–hippocampal interactions may give general insights into wider neural circuits for the use of spatially-organized knowledge. 

## **Acknowledgements** 

HTI is supported by the Max Planck Society, the Behrens-Weise Foundation and the nPRESTO program of the Japan Science and Technology Agency (JPMJPR1682). 

## Technology 

## **References** 

|Andersen,<br> R.A.,<br> Essick,<br> G.K.,<br> Siegel,<br> R.M.,<br> 1985.<br> Encoding<br> of<br> spatial<br> location<br> by<br> pos-|
|---|
|terior<br> parietal<br> neurons.<br> Science<br> 230,<br> 456–458.|
|Bertram,<br> E.H.,<br> Zhang,<br> D.X.,<br> 1999.<br> Thalamic<br> excitation<br> of<br> hippocampal<br> CA1<br> neurons:|
|a<br> comparison<br> with<br> the<br> effects<br> of<br> CA3<br> stimulation.<br> Neuroscience<br> 92,<br> 15–26.|
|Bohbot,<br> V.D.,<br> Kalina,<br> M.,<br> Stepankova,<br> K.,<br> Spackova,<br> N.,<br> Petrides,<br> M.,<br> Nadel,<br> L.,<br> 1998.|
|Spatial<br> memory<br> defcits<br> in<br> patients<br> with<br> lesions<br> to<br> the<br> right<br> hippocampus<br> and|
|to  the<br> right<br> parahippocampal<br> cortex.<br> Neuropsychologia<br> 36,<br> 1217–1238.|
|Brotchie,<br> P.R.,<br> Andersen,<br> R.A.,<br> Snyder,<br> L.H.,<br> Goodman,<br> S.J.,<br> 1995.<br> Head<br> position<br> sig-|
|nals<br> used<br> by<br> parietal<br> neurons<br> to<br> encode<br> locations<br> of<br> visual<br> stimuli.<br> Nature<br> 375,|
|232–235.|
|Burgess,<br> N.,<br> Maguire,<br> E.A.,<br> O’Keefe,<br> J.,<br> 2002.<br> The<br> human<br> hippocampus<br> and<br> spatial<br> and|
|episodic<br> memory.<br> Neuron<br> 35,<br> 625–641.|
|Burgess,<br> P.W.,<br> 2000.<br> Strategy<br> application<br> disorder:<br> the<br> role<br> of<br> the<br> frontal<br> lobes<br> in|
|human<br> multitasking.<br> Psychol.<br> Res.<br> 63,<br> 279–288.|
|Buzsaki,<br> G.,<br> 2015.<br> Hippocampal<br> sharp<br> wave-ripple:<br> a<br> cognitive<br> biomarker<br> for|
|episodic<br> memory<br> and<br> planning.<br> Hippocampus<br> 25,<br> 1073–1188.|
|Carr,<br> M.F.,<br> Jadhav,<br> S.P.,<br> Frank,<br> L.M.,<br> 2011.<br> Hippocampal<br> replay<br> in<br> the<br> awake<br> state:<br> a|
|potential<br> substrate<br> for<br> memory<br> consolidation<br> and<br> retrieval.<br> Nat.<br> Neurosci.<br> 14,|
|147–153.|
|Cassel,<br> J.C.,<br> Pereira<br> de<br> Vasconcelos,<br> A.,<br> Loureiro,<br> M.,<br> Cholvin,<br> T.,<br> Dalrymple-Alford,<br> J.C.,|
|Vertes,<br> R.P.,<br> 2013.<br> The<br> reuniens<br> and<br> rhomboid<br> nuclei:<br> neuroanatomy,<br> electro-|
|physiological<br> characteristics<br> and<br> behavioral<br> implications.<br> Prog.<br> Neurobiol.<br> 111,|
|34–52.|
|Catanese,<br> J.,<br> Viggiano,<br> A.,<br> Cerasti,<br> E.,<br> Zugaro,<br> M.B.,<br> Wiener,<br> S.I.,<br> 2014.<br> Retrospectively|
|and<br> prospectively<br> modulated<br> hippocampal<br> place<br> responses<br> are<br> differentially|
|distributed<br> along<br> a<br> common<br> path<br> in<br> a<br> continuous<br> T-maze.<br> J.<br> Neurosci.<br> 34,|
|13163–13169.|
|Cholvin,<br> T.,<br> Loureiro,<br> M.,<br> Cassel,<br> R.,<br> Cosquer,<br> B.,<br> Geiger,<br> K.,<br> De<br> Sa<br> Nogueira,<br> D.,<br> Rain-|
|gard,<br> H.,<br> Robelin,<br> L.,<br> Kelche,<br> C.,<br> Pereira<br> de<br> Vasconcelos,<br> A.,<br> Cassel,<br> J.C.,<br> 2013.|
|The<br> ventral<br> midline<br> thalamus<br> contributes<br> to<br> strategy<br> shifting<br> in<br> a memory<br> task|
|requiring<br> both<br> prefrontal<br> cortical<br> and<br> hippocampal<br> functions.<br> J. Neurosci.<br> 33,|
|8772–8783.|
|Ciaramelli,<br> E.,<br> 2008.<br> The<br> role<br> of<br> ventromedial<br> prefrontal<br> cortex<br> in<br> navigation:<br> a<br> case|
|of<br> impaired<br> wayfnding<br> and<br> rehabilitation.<br> Neuropsychologia<br> 46,<br> 2099–2105.|
|Climer,<br> J.R.,<br> Newman,<br> E.L.,<br> Hasselmo,<br> M.E.,<br> 2013.<br> Phase<br> coding<br> by<br> grid<br> cells<br> in<br> uncon-|
|strained<br> environments:<br> two-dimensional<br> phase<br> precession.<br> Eur.<br> J.<br> Neurosci.<br> 38,|
|2526–2541.|
|Constantinescu,<br> A.O.,<br> O’Reilly,<br> J.X.,<br> Behrens,<br> T.E.,<br> 2016.<br> Organizing<br> conceptual<br> knowl-|
|edge<br> in<br> humans<br> with<br> a<br> gridlike<br> code.<br> Science<br> 352,<br> 1464–1468.|
|Eichenbaum,<br> H.,<br> Stewart,<br> C.,<br> Morris,<br> R.G.,<br> 1990.<br> Hippocampal<br> representation<br> in<br> place|
|learning.<br> J.<br> Neurosci.<br> 10,<br> 3531–3542.|
|Ekstrom,<br> A.D.,<br> Kahana,<br> M.J.,<br> Caplan,<br> J.B.,<br> Fields,<br> T.A.,<br> Isham,<br> E.A.,<br> Newman,<br> E.L.,<br> Fried,|
|I.,<br> 2003.<br> Cellular<br> networks<br> underlying<br> human<br> spatial<br> navigation.<br> Nature<br> 425,|
|184–188.|
|Felleman,<br> D.J.,<br> Van<br> Essen,<br> D.C.,<br> 1991.<br> Distributed<br> hierarchical<br> processing<br> in<br> the<br> pri-|
|mate<br> cerebral<br> cortex.<br> Cereb.<br> Cortex<br> 1,<br> 1–47.|
|Ferbinteanu,<br> J.,<br> Shapiro,<br> M.L.,<br> 2003.<br> Prospective<br> and<br> retrospective<br> memory<br> coding|
|in<br> the<br> hippocampus.<br> Neuron<br> 40,<br> 1227–1239.|
|Ferino,<br> F.,<br> Thierry,<br> A.M.,<br> Glowinski,<br> J.,<br> 1987.<br> Anatomical<br> and<br> electrophysiological|
|evidence<br> for<br> a<br> direct<br> projection<br> from<br> Ammon’s<br> horn<br> to<br> the<br> medial<br> prefrontal|
|cortex<br> in<br> the<br> rat.<br> Exp.<br> Brain<br> Res.<br> 65,<br> 421–426.|



goal location. 

**4.** 

H.T. Ito / Neuroscience Research 129 (2018) 2–7 

7 

Foster, D.J., Wilson, M.A., 2006. Reverse replay of behavioural sequences in hippocampal place cells during the awake state. Nature 440, 680–683. Frank, L.M., Brown, E.N., Wilson, M., 2000. Trajectory encoding in the hippocampus and entorhinal cortex. Neuron 27, 169–178. Girardeau, G., Benchenane, K., Wiener, S.I., Buzsaki, G., Zugaro, M.B., 2009. Selective suppression of hippocampal ripples impairs spatial memory. Nat. Neurosci. 12, 

suppression 1222–1223. 

Granon, S., Poucet, B., 1995. Medial prefrontal lesions in the rat and spatial navigation: evidence for impaired planning. Behav. Neurosci. 109, 474–484. Gupta, A.S., van der Meer, M.A., Touretzky, D.S., Redish, A.D., 2012. Segmentation of spatial experience by hippocampal theta sequences. Nat. Neurosci. 15, 1032–1039. Hafting, T., Fyhn, M., Molden, S., Moser, M.B., Moser, E.I., 2005. Microstructure of a spatial map in the entorhinal cortex. Nature 436, 801–806. Hembrook, J.R., Mair, R.G., 2011. Lesions of reuniens and rhomboid thalamic nuclei impair radial maze win-shift performance. Hippocampus 21, 815–826. Hembrook, J.R., Onos, K.D., Mair, R.G., 2012. Inactivation of ventral midline thalamus produces selective spatial delayed conditional discrimination impairment in the rat. Hippocampus 22, 853–860. Herkenham, M., 1978. The connections of the nucleus reuniens thalami: evidence for a direct thalamo-hippocampal pathway in the rat. J. Comp. Neurol. 177, 589–610. Hok, V., Save, E., Lenck-Santini, P.P., Poucet, B., 2005. Coding for spatial goals in the prelimbic/infralimbic area of the rat frontal cortex. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 

prelimbic/infralimbic 102, 4602–4607. 

Hok, V., Chah, E., Save, E., Poucet, B., 2013. Prefrontal cortex focally modulates hippocampal place cell firing patterns. J. Neurosci. 33, 3443–3451. Hoover, W.B., Vertes, R.P., 2007. Anatomical analysis of afferent projections to the medial prefrontal cortex in the rat. Brain Struct. Funct. 212, 149–179. Hubel, D.H., Wiesel, T.N., 1959. Receptive fields of single neurones in the cat’s striate cortex. J. Physiol. 148, 574–591. Huxter, J.R., Senior, T.J., Allen, K., Csicsvari, J., 2008. Theta phase-specific codes for two-dimensional position, trajectory and heading in the hippocampus. Nat. Neurosci. 11, 587–594. Ito, H.T., Zhang, S.J., Witter, M.P., Moser, E.I., Moser, M.B., 2015. A prefrontal-thalamohippocampal circuit for goal-directed spatial navigation. Nature 522, 50–55. Jacobs, J., Weidemann, C.T., Miller, J.F., Solway, A., Burke, J.F., Wei, X.X., Suthana, N., Sperling, M.R., Sharan, A.D., Fried, I., Kahana, M.J., 2013. Direct recordings of grid-like neuronal activity in human spatial navigation. Nat. Neurosci. 16, 1188–1190. Jadhav, S.P., Kemere, C., German, P.W., Frank, L.M., 2012. Awake hippocampal sharpwave ripples support spatial memory. Science 336, 1454–1458. Jay, T.M., Witter, M.P., 1991. Distribution of hippocampal CA1 and subicular efferents in the prefrontal cortex of the rat studied by means of anterograde transport of Phaseolus vulgaris-leucoagglutinin. J. Comp. Neurol. 313, 574–586. Johnson, A., Redish, A.D., 2007. Neural ensembles in CA3 transiently encode paths forward of the animal at a decision point. J. Neurosci. 27, 12176–12189. Kropff, E., Carmichael, J.E., Moser, M.B., Moser, E.I., 2015. Speed cells in the medial entorhinal cortex. Nature 523, 419–424. Lee, A.K., Wilson, M.A., 2002. Memory of sequential experience in the hippocampus during slow wave sleep. Neuron 36, 1183–1194. Lohmann, K.J., Putman, N.F., Lohmann, C.M., 2008. Geomagnetic imprinting: a unifying hypothesis of long-distance natal homing in salmon and sea turtles. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 105, 19096–19101. Loureiro, M., Cholvin, T., Lopez, J., Merienne, N., Latreche, A., Cosquer, B., Geiger, K., Kelche, C., Cassel, J.C., Pereira de Vasconcelos, A., 2012. The ventral midline thalamus (reuniens and rhomboid nuclei) contributes to the persistence of spatial memory in rats. J. Neurosci. 32, 9947–9959. Markus, E.J., Barnes, C.A., McNaughton, B.L., Gladden, V.L., Skaggs, W.E., 1994. Spatial information content and reliability of hippocampal CA1 neurons: effects of visual input. Hippocampus 4, 410–421. McNaughton, B.L., Barnes, C.A., Gerrard, J.L., Gothard, K., Jung, M.W., Knierim, J.J., Kudrimoti, H., Qin, Y., Skaggs, W.E., Suster, M., Weaver, K.L., 1996. Deciphering the hippocampal polyglot: the hippocampus as a path integration system. J. Exp. Biol. 199, 173–185. Mehlhorn, J., Rehkamper, G., 2009. Neurobiology of the homing pigeon–a review. Naturwissenschaften 96, 1011–1025. Milner, B., 1982. Some cognitive effects of frontal-lobe lesions in man. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B Biol. Sci. 298, 211–226. Morris, R.G., Garrud, P., Rawlins, J.N., O’Keefe, J., 1982. Place navigation impaired in rats with hippocampal lesions. Nature 297, 681–683. Morris, R.G., 1981. Spatial localization does not require the presence of local cues. Learn. Motiv., 239–260. Moser, E.I., Kropff, E., Moser, M.B., 2008. Place cells, grid cells, and the brain’s spatial representation system. Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 31, 69–89. Moser, E.I., Roudi, Y., Witter, M.P., Kentros, C., Bonhoeffer, T., Moser, M.B., 2014. Grid cells and cortical representation. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 15, 466–481. Muller, R.U., Kubie, J.L., 1987. The effects of changes in the environment on the spatial firing of hippocampal complex-spike cells. J. Neurosci. 7, 1951–1968. 

Muller, M., Wehner, R., 1988. Path integration in desert ants, Cataglyphis fortis. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 85, 5287–5290. Navawongse, R., Eichenbaum, H., 2013. Distinct pathways for rule-based retrieval and spatial mapping of memory representations in hippocampal neurons. J. Neurosci. 33, 1002–1013. O’Keefe, J., Conway, D.H., 1978. Hippocampal place units in the freely moving rat: why they fire where they fire. Exp. Brain Res. 31, 573–590. O’Keefe, J., Dostrovsky, J., 1971. The hippocampus as a spatial map: preliminary evidence from unit activity in the freely-moving rat. Brain Res. 34, 171–175. O’Keefe, J., Nadel, L., 1978. The Hippocampus as a Cognitive Map. Oxford University Press. O’Keefe, J., Recce, M.L., 1993. Phase relationship between hippocampal place units and the EEG theta rhythm. Hippocampus 3, 317–330. Pfeiffer, B.E., Foster, D.J., 2013. Hippocampal place-cell sequences depict future paths to remembered goals. Nature 497, 74–79. Poucet, B., Save, E., Lenck-Santini, P.P., 2000. Sensory and memory properties of hippocampal place cells. Rev. Neurosci. 11, 95–111. Quirk, G.J., Muller, R.U., Kubie, J.L., 1990. The firing of hippocampal place cells in the dark depends on the rat’s recent experience. J. Neurosci. 10, 2008–2017. Rajasethupathy, P., Sankaran, S., Marshel, J.H., Kim, C.K., Ferenczi, E., Lee, S.Y., Berndt, A., Ramakrishnan, C., Jaffe, A., Lo, M., Liston, C., Deisseroth, K., 2015. Projections from neocortex mediate top-down control of memory retrieval. Nature 526, 653–659. Rosenbaum, R.S., Priselac, S., Kohler, S., Black, S.E., Gao, F., Nadel, L., Moscovitch, M., 2000. Remote spatial memory in an amnesic person with extensive bilateral hippocampal lesions. Nat. Neurosci. 3, 1044–1048. Rossi, M.A., Hayrapetyan, V.Y., Maimon, B., Mak, K., Je, H.S., Yin, H.H., 2012. Prefrontal cortical mechanisms underlying delayed alternation in mice. J. Neurophysiol. 108, 1211–1222. Sarel, A., Finkelstein, A., Las, L., Ulanovsky, N., 2017. Vectorial representation of spatial goals in the hippocampus of bats. Science 355, 176–180. Sargolini, F., Fyhn, M., Hafting, T., McNaughton, B.L., Witter, M.P., Moser, M.B., Moser, E.I., 2006. Conjunctive representation of position, direction, and velocity in entorhinal cortex. Science 312, 758–762. Save, E., Cressant, A., Thinus-Blanc, C., Poucet, B., 1998. Spatial firing of hippocampal place cells in blind rats. J. Neurosci. 18, 1818–1826. Shallice, T., 1982. Specific impairments of planning. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B Biol. Sci. 298, 199–209. Spellman, T., Rigotti, M., Ahmari, S.E., Fusi, S., Gogos, J.A., Gordon, J.A., 2015. Hippocampal-prefrontal input supports spatial encoding in working memory. Nature 522, 309–314. Spiers, H.J., Burgess, N., Hartley, T., Vargha-Khadem, F., O’Keefe, J., 2001. Bilateral hippocampal pathology impairs topographical and episodic memory but not visual pattern matching. Hippocampus 11, 715–725. Spiers, H.J., 2008. Keeping the goal in mind: prefrontal contributions to spatial navigation. Neuropsychologia 46, 2106–2108. Steffenach, H.A., Witter, M., Moser, M.B., Moser, E.I., 2005. Spatial memory in the rat requires the dorsolateral band of the entorhinal cortex. Neuron 45, 301–313. Stemmler, M., Mathis, A., Herz, A.V., 2015. Connecting multiple spatial scales to decode the population activity of grid cells. Sci. Adv. 1, e1500816. Swanson, L.W., 1981. A direct projection from Ammon’s horn to prefrontal cortex in the rat. Brain Res. 217, 150–154. Teng, E., Squire, L.R., 1999. Memory for places learned long ago is intact after hippocampal damage. Nature 400, 675–677. Tolman, E.C., Ritchie, B.F., Kalish, D., 1946. Studies in spatial learning I. Orientation and the short-cut. J. Exp. Psychol. 36, 13–24. Tolman, E.C., 1948. Cognitive maps in rats and men. Psychol. Rev. 55, 189–208. Vertes, R.P., Hoover, W.B., Szigeti-Buck, K., Leranth, C., 2007. Nucleus reuniens of the midline thalamus: link between the medial prefrontal cortex and the hippocampus. Brain Res. Bull. 71, 601–609. Wehner, R., Wehner, S., 1986. Path integration in desert ants: approaching a longstanding puzzle in insect navigation. Monitore Zool. Ital. 20, 309–331. Wehner, R., 1984. Astronavigation in insects. Ann. Rev. Entomol. 29, 277–298. Wikenheiser, A.M., Redish, A.D., 2015. Hippocampal theta sequences reflect current goals. Nat. Neurosci. 18, 289–294. Wittlinger, M., Wehner, R., Wolf, H., 2006. The ant odometer: stepping on stilts and stumps. Science 312, 1965–1967. Wood, E.R., Dudchenko, P.A., Robitsek, R.J., Eichenbaum, H., 2000. Hippocampal neurons encode information about different types of memory episodes occurring in the same location. Neuron 27, 623–633. Wouterlood, F.G., Saldana, E., Witter, M.P., 1990. Projection from the nucleus reuniens thalami to the hippocampal region: light and electron microscopic tracing study in the rat with the anterograde tracer Phaseolus vulgarisleucoagglutinin. J. Comp. Neurol. 296, 179–203. Xu, W., Sudhof, T.C., 2013. A neural circuit for memory specificity and generalization. Science 339, 1290–1295. Yoon, T., Okada, J., Jung, M.W., Kim, J.J., 2008. Prefrontal cortex and hippocampus subserve different components of working memory in rats. Learn. Mem. 15, 97–105. 

firing 

