**==> picture [55 x 60] intentionally omitted <==**

Neuropsychologia 46 (2008) 2106–2108 

**==> picture [142 x 72] intentionally omitted <==**

## Keeping the goal in mind: Prefrontal contributions to spatial navigation 

## Hugo J. Spiers[∗] 

_Institute of Behavioural Neuroscience, Department of Psychology, University College London, 26 Bedford Way, London WC1H 0AP, United Kingdom_ Available online 19 February 2008 

_Keywords:_ Wayfinding; Spatial memory; Inhibition; Planning; Orbitofrontal 

On his voyage home, Odysseus is nearly seduced to his death by the singing of the sirens. Odysseus’s crew, their ears plugged with wax, thankfully do not hear his desperate pleas to change course. While such trials are not a feature of our daily travels, a variety of distractions can send us off course. In this issue, Ciaramelli (2008) reports a patient who repeatedly suffers from this affliction, being lured away to unintended locations. The study provides new insights into the neural basis of spatial navigation. 

Our capacity for navigation is thought to rely on a distributed network of brain regions, which include the hippocampus, parahippocampus, retrosplenial cortex, parietal cortex, and caudate nucleus (see e.g. Aguirre & D’Esposito, 1999; Spiers & Maguire, 2007a). Each region is thought to serve a different functionofournavigationmachinery,suchasrepresentingamap of large-scale space, converting the map to egocentric space, or representing our current viewpoint. However, the neural substrate of one particular function remains a mystery. How does the brain represent spatial goal locations or guide navigation to them? Several lines of evidence suggest this may be the preserve of the prefrontal cortex. 

The prefrontal cortex has long been associated with behavioural flexibility, working memory and planning; functions important for achieving goals (Fuster, 1989; Luria, 1969; Passingham, 1993). It also integrates highly processed information important for guiding goal-directed behaviour (Pandya & Barnes, 1987). Several functional neuroimaging studies have revealed increased activity in prefrontal areas during spatial navigation tasks (Gron, Wunderlich, Spitzer, Tomczak, & Riepe, 2000; Hartley, Maguire, Spiers, & Burgess, 2003; Maguire et al., 1998; Yoshida & Ishii, 2006), one directly linking prefrontal activity to goal processing (Spiers & Maguire, 2006, 2007b). In rodents, medial and orbital prefrontal lesions have been found to 

> ∗ Tel.: +44 7670 7553. _E-mail address:_ h.spiers@ucl.ac.uk. 

impair certain aspects of navigation (Lacroix, White, & Feldon, 2002; Vafaei & Rashidy-Pour, 2004), and recently cells in these regions have been found to code spatial information about goals (Feierstein, Quirk, Uchida, Sosulski, & Mainen, 2006; Hok, Save, Lenck-Santini, & Poucet, 2005). However, it remains uncertain whether the human prefrontal cortex is _necessary_ for navigation. 

In a recent article in Neuropsychologia new evidence has emerged suggesting that the ventromedial prefrontal cortex (vmPFC) is required for navigation (Ciaramelli, 2008). Ciaramelli (2008) tested a patient with bilateral damage to the ventromedial prefrontal and rostral anterior cingulate cortices whose central complaint, following recovery, was of wayfinding difficulties. Despite good topographical knowledge of his hometown he performed very poorly, compared to healthy controls,whenaskedtodescribeasetofroutesbetweenlocations in the town. However, his performance improved substantially when he was given the name of his destination or a cue to rehearse the destination at regular intervals. No such improvement occurred when a visual stimulus was presented at similar intervals. Thus, it appears the vmPFC is necessary for navigation and its role may be to maintain the goal destination in working memory (Ciaramelli, 2008). That the problem lies with working memory is further supported by the patient’s generalised deficits on standardized tasks requiring working memory. 

However, deficits elicited by laboratory tasks do not always predict deficits in the ‘real world’ (Habib & Sirigu, 1987; Kapur & Pearson, 1983; Maguire, Burke, Phillips, & Staunton, 1996; Spiers, Burgess, Hartley, Vargha-Khadem, & O’Keefe, 2001). Indeed, a cue to rehearse the destination might not be as beneficial during navigation of a complex and bustling town. Appropriately, the patient’s ability to actively navigate in the town was assessed under similar cue conditions to the laboratory task, with a strikingly similar pattern of results. 

Further insight into this patient’s problem was generated by an analysis of the errors made in relation to several factors, including familiarity, route length, number of turns, etc. 

0028-3932 © 2008 Elsevier Ltd. Open access under CC BY license. doi:10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2008.01.028 

_H.J. Spiers / Neuropsychologia 46 (2008) 2106–2108_ 

2107 

(Ciaramelli, 2008). Of these factors, only familiarity was found to be associated with the number of errors. While successful routeswereratedmorefamiliar,surprisingly,thereversewastrue of highly familiar locations on the route. Intriguingly, two-thirds of error trials involved the route ending at one of a number of personally familiar locations, each associated with the patient’s previous work or hobbies. According to Ciaramelli (2008) these locations, being highly salient, acted as “attractor” locations, luring the patient away from his true goal. Thus, the vmPFC may be necessary not only to maintain the goal in memory, but also to suppress irrelevant information. 

Thesefindingsagreewellwiththoseofarecentneuroimaging study exploring the brain activity of London taxi drivers as they navigated a highly accurate virtual simulation of London (UK) (Spiers & Maguire, 2006, 2007b). In this study, the relationship between the subject’s thoughts during navigation and their brain activity was examined using a retrospective verbal report protocol. Immediately post-scan, subjects watched a video replay of their performance and reported what they had been thinking while they were doing the task in the scanner. Of the wide variety of thoughts reported, the most frequent concerned thinking about the goal and the route to it (see Spiers & Maguire, in press, for full details). These were associated with increased activity in anterior BA10 and in a medial prefrontal region overlapping with the dorsal extent of the lesion of the patient described by Ciaramelli (2008). Given the latest findings, it could be argued the medial region is involved in maintaining goal representation while B10 may be important for manipulating information for planning (Koechlin, Basso, Pietrini, Panzer, & Grafman, 1999). Further evidence that cells in the medial prefrontal region might monitor spatial goals comes from the finding that activity in a region on the border of BA9 and BA32 correlated with proximity to the goal during navigation (Spiers & Maguire, 2007b). A more ventral medial prefrontal region was activated when subjectslistenedtonavigationallyirrelevantcommentsofcustomers whilst navigating (Spiers & Maguire, 2006). Ciaramelli (2008) suggests this may have been related to the mental rehearsal or ‘energizing’ of the actual goals. An alternative, related, interpretation is that the region is activated by the requirement to suppress processing of the new information in posterior cortical regions. 

Ciaramelli (2008) argues that the patient’s deficit may arise from three related difficulties. These are: (a) an inability to actively maintain the goal in working memory, (b) a reversallearning problem, and (c) a loss of the grammar that prescribes the transitions between attractor states in cortical networks. The last problem would make it difficult for the patient to avoid personally familiar locations, as these would be represented by strong attractors. A view favoured here, in line with other authors (Burgess, Veitch, Costello, & Shallice, 2000; Shallice & Burgess, 1991), is that the deficit can more readily be summarised as a failure to maintain the _intention_ to reach the destination in working memory and a reduced suppression of previously learned information (in this case routes). A similar lack of suppression may underlie the reversal-learning deficit seen in such patients (Fellows & Farah, 2003), rather than vice versa. 

Most new research generates more questions than answers, as is the case here. Along with replicating the findings in other similar patients, a number of questions remain to be answered. Can the patient learn routes in an unfamiliar environment? At what point in the route is the intention lost? Given that medial prefrontal activity is correlated with goal proximity (Spiers & Maguire, 2007b), might the patient be unable to make use of novel shortcuts or reach the goal after a detour? Which region calculatesproximityordirectionalinformationtogoals?Though there is much still to be explored, the results from Ciaramelli (2008) add to our understanding of the neural processes supporting navigation. Given this new insight, when your mind next drifts and you arrive at a familiar but unintended destination, you will know which part of your neuroanatomy to blame. 

## **Acknowledgement** 

The author is funded by a Wellcome Trust advanced training fellowship in basic biomedical science. 

## **References** 

- Aguirre, G. K., & D’Esposito, M. (1999). Topographical disorientation: A synthesis and taxonomy. _Brain_ , _122_ (9), 1613–1628. 

- Burgess, P. W., Veitch, E., Costello, A., & Shallice, T. (2000). The cognitive and neuroanatomical correlates of multitasking. _Neuropsychologia_ , _38_ , 848– 863. 

- Ciaramelli, E. (2008). The role of ventromedial prefrontal cortex in navigation: A case of impaired wayfinding and rehabilitation. _Neuropsychologia_ , _46_ , 2099–2105. 

- Feierstein, C. E., Quirk, M. C., Uchida, N., Sosulski, D. L., & Mainen, Z. F. (2006). Representation of spatial goals in rat orbitofrontal cortex. _Neuron_ , _51_ , 495–507. 

- Fellows, L. K., & Farah, M. J. (2003). Ventromedial frontal cortex mediates affective shifting in humans: Evidence from a reversal learning paradigm. _Brain_ , _126_ , 1830–1837. 

- Fuster, J. M. (1989). _The prefrontal cortex_ New York: Raven. 

- Gron, G., Wunderlich, A. P., Spitzer, M., Tomczak, R., & Riepe, M. W. (2000). Brain activation during human navigation: Gender-different neural networks as substrate of performance. _Nature Neuroscience_ , _3_ , 404–408. 

- Habib, M., & Sirigu, A. (1987). Pure topographical disorientation: A definition and anatomical basis. _Cortex_ , _23_ , 73–85. 

- Hartley, T., Maguire, E. A., Spiers, H. J., & Burgess, N. (2003). The well-worn route and the path less travelled: Distinct neural bases of route following and wayfinding in humans. _Neuron_ , _37_ , 877–888. 

- Hok, V., Save, E., Lenck-Santini, P. P., & Poucet, B. (2005). Coding for spatial goals in the prelimbic/infralimbic area of the rat frontal cortex. _Proceedings of the National Academy of Science USA_ , _102_ (12), 4602–4607. 

- Kapur, N., & Pearson, D. (1983). Memory symptoms and memory performance of neurological patients. _British Journal of Psychology_ , _74_ , 409–415. 

- Koechlin, E., Basso, G., Pietrini, P., Panzer, S., & Grafman, J. (1999). The role of the anterior prefrontal cortex in human cognition. _Nature_ , _399_ , 148–151. 

- Lacroix, L., White, I., & Feldon, J. (2002). Effect of excitotoxic lesions of rat medial prefrontal cortex on spatial memory. _Behavioural Brain Research_ , _133_ (1), 69–81. 

- Luria, A. R. (1969). Frontal lobe syndromes. In P. J. Vinken & G. W. Bruyn (Eds.), _Handbook of clinical neurology_ (pp. 725–757). New York: Elsevier. 

- Maguire, E. A., Burke, T., Phillips, J., & Staunton, H. (1996). Topographical disorientation following unilateral temporal lobe lesions in humans. _Neuropsychologia_ , _34_ , 993–1001. 

- Maguire, E. A., Burgess, N., Donnett, J. G., Frackowiak, R. S. J., Frith, C. D., & O’Keefe, J. (1998). Knowing where and getting there: A human navigation network. _Science_ , _280_ , 921–924. 

_H.J. Spiers / Neuropsychologia 46 (2008) 2106–2108_ 

2108 

- Pandya, D. N., & Barnes, C. L. (1987). Architecture and connections of the frontal lobe. In E. Perecman (Ed.), _The frontal lobes revisited_ (pp. 41–72). New York: IRBN. 

- Passingham, R. (1993). _The frontal lobes and voluntary action_ . Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press. 

- Shallice, T., & Burgess, N. (1991). Deficits of strategy application following frontal lobe damage in man. _Brain_ , _114_ , 727–741. 

- Spiers, H. J., & Maguire, E. A. (2006). Thoughts, behaviour, and brain dynamics 

   - during navigation in the real world. _Neuroimage_ , _31_ (4), 1826–1840. 

- Spiers, H. J., & Maguire, E. A. (2007a). The neuroscience of remote spatial memory: A tale of two cites. _Neuroscience_ , _149_ , 7–27. 

   - Spiers, H. J., & Maguire, E. A. (in press). The dynamic nature of cognition during wayfinding. _Journal of Environmental Psychology_ , doi:10.1016/j. jenvp.2008.02.006. 

   - Spiers, H. J., Burgess, N., Hartley, T., Vargha-Khadem, F., & O’Keefe, J. (2001). Bilateral hippocampal pathology impairs topographical and episodic memory but not visual pattern matching. _Hippocampus_ , _11_ , 715–725. 

   - Vafaei, A. A., & Rashidy-Pour, A. (2004). Reversible lesions of the rat’s orbitofrontal cortex interferes with hippocampus-dependent spatial memory. _Behavioural Brain Research_ , _149_ , 61–68. 

   - Yoshida, W., & Ishii, S. (2006). Resolution of uncertainty in prefrontal cortex. _Neuron_ , _50_ (5), 781–789. 

- Spiers, H. J., & Maguire, E. A. (2007b). A navigational guidance system in the human brain. _Hippocampus_ , _17_ , 618–626. 

