## REVIEWS 

**==> picture [72 x 15] intentionally omitted <==**

## The neural bases for timing of durations 

_Albert Tsao[1]_[ ✉] _, S. Aryana Yousefzadeh[2] , Warren H. Meck[2] , May-Britt Moser[3] and Edvard I. Moser[3]_[ ✉] 

Abstract | Durations are defined by a beginning and an end, and a major distinction is drawn between durations that start in the present and end in the future (‘prospective timing’) and durations that start in the past and end either in the past or the present (‘retrospective timing’). Different psychological processes are thought to be engaged in each of these cases. The former is thought to engage a clock-like mechanism that accurately tracks the continuing passage of time, whereas the latter is thought to engage a reconstructive process that utilizes both temporal and non-temporal information from the memory of past events. We propose that, from a biological perspective, these two forms of duration estimation are supported by computational processes that are both reliant on population state dynamics but are nevertheless distinct. Prospective timing is effectively carried out in a single step where the ongoing dynamics of population activity directly serve as the computation of duration, whereas retrospective timing is carried out in two steps: the initial generation of population state dynamics through the process of event segmentation and the subsequent computation of duration utilizing the memory of those dynamics. 

Prospective timing The estimation of an ongoing duration in the present moment. 

## Events 

The basic units of organization for experience, defined primarily as perceived time intervals whose beginnings and ends are clearly defined. 

## Retrospective timing 

The estimation of duration based on memory of past events. 

_1Department of Biology, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA._ 

_2Department of Psychology and Neuroscience, Duke University, Durham, NC, USA._ 

_3Centre for Neural Computation, Kavli Institute for Systems Neuroscience, Norwegian University of Science and Technology, Trondheim, Norway._ 

✉ _e-mail: at7@stanford.edu; edvard.moser@ntnu.no_ https://doi.org/10.1038/ s41583-022-00623-3 

How the brain naturally perceives and retains time has been the focus of many studies over the past few decades[1][–][8] . As time is composed of the two concepts of order and duration[9][,][10] , this question may be divided into separate questions of how the brain perceives and remembers either order or duration. In this Review, we focus on duration, and more specifically on whether the processes for perceiving ongoing duration in the present moment (prospective timing) are the same as those used for estimating duration based on memory of past events (retrospective timing) (Box 1 and Fig. 1). The most basic requirement for timing is that each moment in time can be uniquely represented, and current evidence suggests that both types of timing achieve this requirement through population-level representations of time. However, how these representations arise and how they are subsequently used for estimating duration may differ substantially, and we examine and discuss the evidence for this. We also discuss a number of potentially important ways in which these two types of timing and their mechanisms might interact, although investigation of these interactions still remains preliminary. 

## **Prospective timing** 

The main computational goal for prospective timing is to accurately track elapsed time within an ongoing interval. Consequently, a major class of models for prospective timing is based on the concept of an internal 

clock, which generates an explicit linear metrical representation of time that can be used for estimation of duration[11][–][13] . Early models proposed that the internal clock would be implemented through a pacemaker– accumulator mechanism[11][–][13] in which pulses generated by a central pacemaker would be integrated by an accumulator to generate estimates of time. However, outside the circadian system[14][,][15] , evidence for biological implementation of such a mechanism has been missing. Subsequently, it has been proposed that the internal clock is implemented through coincidence detection of oscillatory activity patterns[16][–][18] , but, even though changes in oscillatory activity have been correlated to timing behaviour[19][–][21] , evidence of coincidence detection has also been missing. 

Although pacemaker–accumulator models are intuitively familiar owing to their similarity to physical clocks, a regular pacemaker is not actually needed for the purpose of timing duration[22] . Instead, time can be encoded through changes in neural population activity over time, or population state dynamics, as long as each moment in physical time corresponds to a unique population activity pattern. This type of timing mechanism has sometimes been referred to as a ‘population clock’, and it does not necessarily need to generate a linear metrical representation of time[23][,][24] . Additionally, it subsumes the pacemaker–accumulator mechanism into a single process — change in neural activity[25] . In the following 

**646**[|] November 2022[|] volume 23 

**www.nature.com/nrn** 

Reviews 

## Box 1 | **Terminology** 

In this review, we use the terms ‘prospective timing’ and ‘retrospective timing’ as shorthand for duration estimated from ongoing events and duration estimated from the memory of past events, respectively. Although usage of these terms is well established[160][,][161][,][334] , there are a few points to clarify regarding their usage. First, retrospective timing is operationally defined as the estimation of a duration when subjects are unaware beforehand that they will estimate the duration, whereas prospective timing is defined as estimation of duration when subjects are aware beforehand[161] . The logic of this operational definition is that, particularly during prospective timing, subjects have the opportunity to explicitly track the passage of time. Thus, in the case where estimation occurs after the duration has ended but subjects are already aware beforehand that they will eventually estimate duration, this would still be considered prospective timing. Second, ‘prospective timing’ and ‘retrospective timing’ refer specifically to the estimation of duration, even though timing encompasses temporal order in addition to duration. Whether there exists a similar distinction between temporal order based on ongoing events as opposed to memory of past events is unclear. Finally, ‘prospective timing’ overlaps with other commonly used terms such as ‘interval timing’ and ‘reward timing’, whereas ‘retrospective timing’ partially overlaps with ‘episodic timing’, and each has also been referred to as ‘experienced duration’ and ‘remembered duration’, respectively[335] . 

subsections, we discuss how prospective timing is carried out using population state dynamics, primarily focusing on a number of recent studies that have actually observed population state dynamics by recording from single neurons in animals engaged in duration estimation tasks. 

## _**Explicit prospective timing**_ 

Prospective timing can occur either explicitly or implicitly[26][–][28] . During explicit timing, subjects are aware that they should specifically attend to the passage of time in order to either perceive a duration defined by external sensory events (‘sensory timing’) or time their own action (‘motor timing’). Recent studies recording single-cell activity from brain areas involved in prospective timing provide evidence that during both sensory timing[29][–][33] and motor timing[34][–][42] , as well as combined sensorimotor timing[43][,][44] , neural population activity evolves in a stereotyped way across a series of population activity states, defining a stable ‘neural trajectory’ which provides significant and reliable temporal information (Fig. 2). Moreover, inactivation of brain areas exhibiting trajectories negatively impacts duration estimation[30][,][35][,][39][,][43][,][45] , and trial-to-trial variability of trajectories has been observed to be correlated with animals’ time estimates[30][,][35][,][37][,][38][,][40] , together suggesting a causal link from trajectories to duration estimation. Beyond the timing of a single duration, neural trajectories have also been observed during the timing of multiple durations within more complex temporal structures, such as rhythmic sequences[46][–][49] . For example, using a task in which monkeys had to tap at fixed intervals between 450 and 1,000 ms according to a metronome, Merchant and colleagues observed that over the course of the tapping rhythm, neural trajectories evolved in a circular pattern with interval duration effectively being encoded by the radius of the trajectory[47][,][49] , providing an intuitive illustration of how neural trajectories can function as population clocks for prospective timing. 

## Population clock 

The encoding of temporal information through changes in neural population activity over time. 

## Explicit timing 

Prospective timing in which subjects are aware that they should attend to the passage of time to either estimate a duration defined by external events or generate a timed action. 

## Neural trajectory 

A sequence of population states over time which describe the evolution of neural population activity. 

## Implicit timing 

Prospective timing in which no overt timing behaviour is required. 

Neural trajectories are capable of encoding temporal information for durations spanning roughly 1 s to 

at least several minutes. The lower bound of 1 s reflects the distinction between subsecond and suprasecond timing mechanisms[50][–][54] , although there is not a strict boundary between the two as they overlap within the range of roughly 0.5–1 s (reFs.[52][,][55] ). Indeed, potentially reflecting this overlap, neural trajectories encoding durations several hundred milliseconds long have also been observed, with no apparent difference from trajectories encoding longer durations[30][,][43][,][56] . The upper bound of several minutes was established by a recent study recording neural activity while rats engaged in a task where they had to obtain a reward within a 3-s window that occurred every 5 or 8 min. Stable neural trajectories in the form of sequential activity were observed in both the hippocampus and the striatum spanning the entirety of the minutes-long intervals. Task performance was also dependent on hippocampal activity[57] , consistent with a growing number of studies suggesting that for durations of tens of seconds and longer, the hippocampus may play a central role[58][–][61] . Whether stable neural trajectories are able to encode even longer durations beyond several minutes and whether there exists a maximum limit remain to be determined. 

Neural trajectories reflect the activity of single neurons exhibiting a range of different activity patterns, some of which contain clear correlations with time. One of the most common time-related activity patterns observed in single cells is ramping activity, where a neuron monotonically increases its firing in a linear manner, often across the entirety of an interval[22][,][29][,][31][,][34][,][39][,][46][,][62][–][68] (Fig. 3a,b). Neurons exhibiting unimodal peak activity at specific moments within the ongoing duration are also commonly observed[30][,][32][,][35][,][36][,][38][,][48][,][69][–][73] (Fig. 3c). Across a population of such neurons, their progressive activations form a sequence of activity that can span an interval. In addition to these two specific types of single-cell activity pattern, neural trajectories are also made up of neurons exhibiting more complex activity patterns, ranging from non-monotonic ramping activity, which still exhibits clear correlations with time, to patterns which exhibit no obvious relation to time but are nevertheless stable across repeated trials[29][,][37][,][43][,][46][,][74][–][76] (Fig. 3a,b). Whether ramping activity and sequential activity play special roles within prospective timing remains to be determined, although recent computational work suggests that sequential activity may be a particularly effective representation of time for downstream readout[36] . For the purpose of defining a stable trajectory capable of supporting prospective timing however, the only requirements placed on single-cell activity patterns are that some subpopulation exhibits stable repeatable patterns, and that across individual moments in time, overall population activity states are different. There is no requirement for single-cell activity patterns to encode significant temporal information themselves. 

## _**Implicit prospective timing**_ 

Prospective timing can also occur implicitly, in the absence of any overt timing behaviour at all[26][–][28][,][77][–][79] (implicit timing). Just as in motor timing, where subjects learn to predict when to initiate an action relative to an external cue, in a similar manner subjects may also 

NATure revIeWS **[|] NeuRoScieNce** 

volume 23[|] November 2022[|] **647** 

Reviews 

learn to predict when external events will happen within a stable and repeated temporal structure (‘temporal expectation’), allowing more efficient and accurate processing of task-related information[26][,][77][–][80] . As with sensory and motor timing, there is also evidence that neural trajectories can encode such learned temporal expectations. Recording from the premotor cortex of monkeys during a detection task for a mechanical stimulus that would occur within a fixed temporal window which was unannounced, Carnevale et al. observed that neural population activity evolved in a manner reflecting this window of expectation[81] . Specifically, the distance between the neural trajectory and an estimated decision threshold within neural state space was reduced during the window of expectation. The impact of temporal expectation can also extend to sensory representations[82][–][85] . In the visual cortex of monkeys trained to detect a stimulus change whose likelihood of occurring followed a fixed temporal pattern, neural responses become modulated by this pattern[82] . Similarly, in the primary auditory cortex of rats trained to discriminate a target sound that occurred with high probability during a specific period within a trial, single neurons exhibit increasingly enhanced frequency tuning as this period of high expectation approaches, as well as enhanced tuning during the period itself[83] . 

**==> picture [300 x 275] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
a  Prospective timing b  Retrospective timing<br>Physical time Physical time<br>Present Present<br>moment moment<br>Elapsed duration<br>Stable temporal structure Duration can be measured between<br>defining an interval any pair of past events<br>Reference point (past event) Reference points (all past events)<br>End of duration<br>Reference<br>event<br>Physical time Physical time<br>Perceived time Perceived time<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


Fig. 1 | **Prospective and retrospective timing. a** | During prospective timing, the time point being measured from (‘reference point’) is established beforehand, allowing the physical passage of time to be explicitly tracked (top). Prospective timing estimates are relatively accurate but follow the scalar property, exhibiting increased variability (grey shading) as physical duration increases (bottom). **b** | By contrast, retrospective timing reflects the physical passage of time indirectly through the event structure of experience, which occurs across time (top). Unlike for prospective timing, which is in relation to a fixed reference event, the time points defining the interval to be estimated are freely chosen from past events. Retrospective timing estimates can be more variable and less accurate (bottom). 

Because the learning of temporal expectation can occur in the absence of explicit timing behaviour, any task which contains a stable temporal structure may potentially engage it. Indeed, animal studies recording from neural populations often use behavioural paradigms that contain a stable temporal structure but lack overt timing behaviour, and a growing number of studies have now observed stable neural trajectories defined by the temporal structure of these tasks, which appear to encode the passage of time[63][,][71][,][72][,][86][,][87] . Illustrative of this is the observation of hippocampal time cells during fixed delay periods within the stable temporal structure of trial-based non-timing tasks such as the delayed match-to-sample task[6][,][69][,][70][,][88] . During this delay period, time cells individually fire at specific moments of time such that the overall population of these cells tiles the entire interval, and this sequence of activity defines a stable neural trajectory (Fig. 3c). Although these sequences are observed during tasks that lack any explicit timing behaviour that would necessitate a representation of time, control analyses and experiments demonstrate that this sequential activity is not simply due to obvious time-correlated variables such as animal movement[70][,][89][,][90] , and suggest that it is in fact a representation of the passage of time. 

The apparent ubiquity of stable trajectories observed in non-timing tasks across a wide range of brain areas[87][,][91][,][92] raises the possibility that the presence of stable trajectories and the ability to decode temporal information accurately do not necessarily imply that this temporal information is used by the brain[86][,][93] . Although this may be true in many cases, the fact that temporal expectation acts on internal representations means that its effects on behaviour may be subtler, and determining whether or how particular representations of time are actually used by the brain may require closer examination, similar to what has been shown recently in the separate context of motor learning[94] . As an example, recent studies by Heys and colleagues demonstrated that sequential activity is present in the medial entorhinal cortex (MEC) of mice engaged in a motor timing task[95] , but inactivation of the MEC impacts behaviour only if inactivation occurrs during the initial learning of the task, resulting in delayed acquisition of the motor timing behaviour[96] . Thus, the apparent use of MEC sequential activity may be limited to the initial learning phase only. For motor timing tasks in general, the initial learning of when to generate timed responses poses a particular challenge, as the range of times with which a subject may respond is vast. However, if subjects are able to form hypotheses about when to act[97][,][98] — temporal expectations related to learning — this would effectively restrict the time window within which learning of motor timing occurs and allow more efficient learning. Sequential activity in the MEC may serve this purpose, and such a role may generalize to other temporal associations as well[99][,][100] . To be effective, temporal expectations guiding learning would have to be generated at a much faster rate than the motor learning itself, and sequential activity in the MEC has in fact been observed to arise immediately following exposure to new environments[95] . Human functional imaging experiments suggest that the hippocampus may also play a similar role in guiding the learning of prospective timing 

**648**[|] November 2022[|] volume 23 

**www.nature.com/nrn** 

Reviews 

Recurrent neural networks Neural networks in which each unit can receive input from other units in the network in addition to external input. 

behaviours[101] , and hippocampal time cells also show fast adaptation to new temporal contexts[70][,][102] . More generally, the fact that sequential activity is observed across a wide range of brain areas under similar experimental conditions may reflect the role of sequential activity as a general scaffold for supporting subsequent learning of time-related responses[36][,][103] . 

## _**Neural trajectories as a mechanism**_ 

Although similar time-varying population activity is observed across sensory timing, motor timing and temporal expectation, this does not necessarily mean that the way in which these activity patterns are subsequently used for time estimation is also shared across all three types of prospective timing. Indeed, sensory timing differs in a basic way from both motor timing and temporal expectation in that the end of a duration during sensory timing is defined by an external event rather than being internally determined[23] . Thus, the terminal state of a neural trajectory during sensory timing is dictated by external input, whereas it would be internally generated during motor timing or temporal expectation. 

Experimental observations are consistent with this difference between sensory timing versus motor timing and temporal expectation. In sensory and motor timing tasks where multiple durations are discriminated or generated, the way in which the different durations are encoded differs. During discrimination of different durations for sensory timing, neural population activity evolves along a common trajectory for all of the durations but reaches different terminal states corresponding to specific physical durations[29][–][31][,][56] (Fig. 2c,e). In contrast, during generation of an action at different durations for motor timing, a similar trajectory evolves for all durations, reaching a common terminal state that triggers action, and the durations are instead represented by the speed at which the trajectory evolves[35][,][39][,][40][,][43][,][44][,][56][,][104] (Fig. 2c,e). As a result, temporal scaling of activity patterns reflective of different durations can be observed at both the population level and the single-cell level (Figs. 2c,e and 3b). Finally, for temporal expectation, the learned period of expectation is reflected through a shift in popu lation state that reflects the predictable external temporal structure[82][–][85] . Thus, as with motor timing, trajectory speed plays a central role in the timing of expectation as it determines when this shift is reached. 

It is important to note that for all three types of prospective timing, estimation using neural trajectories implies that the terminal state of a trajectory directly serves as the duration estimate — the computation of the duration is carried out by the population state dynamics that lead to a specific terminal state[105] . In other words, the evolution of activity along a neural trajectory is itself the estimation process. If this is the case, then speeding up or slowing down of population state dynamics should have a predictable impact on timing. The fact that trial-to-trial fluctuations in trajectory speed are correlated with trial-to-trial behavioural variability suggests this[30] , but two studies have taken a somewhat more direct approach by controlling the temperature of brain areas which are involved in prospective timing and exhibit stable neural trajectories. Xu et al. found 

that cooling the medial prefrontal cortex (which presumably slowed down population state dynamics) of rats engaged in a motor timing task resulted in longer response times[37] . Similarly, Monteiro et al. bidirectionally manipulated the temperature of the striatum in rats engaged in an interval categorization task, and found that duration judgments were shorter when the temperature was increased (presumably speeding up population state dynamics) and vice versa[106] . Although these studies provide support for the idea that prospective timing is carried out through population state dynamics, more precise manipulations are still needed. 

During sensory timing, because durations are defined by external input, it is possible for the estimation of duration to be separated from the duration itself. This raises the possibility of a separate, cognitively different type of sensory timing. If metrical representations of specific moments in physical time corresponding to the start and end of the duration are generated and maintained in memory, it would be possible to alternatively determine duration through temporal arithmetic of these representations, rather than through population state dynamics. This version of sensory timing would also differ from sensory timing in which estimation is carried out through population state dynamics but then stored in working memory in order to guide behaviour at a later time point. Neurons encoding specific moments in physical time have been observed, and often do appear to reflect a metrical representation of time[72][,][107] , while neurons encoding the difference between two durations have also been observed[108] , suggesting that the brain is capable of carrying out arithmetic operations on abstract temporal quantities. Nevertheless, direct evidence for estimation of duration through temporal arithmetic remains to be observed. Moreover, in an interval categorization task where monkeys had to categorize durations as belonging to either long or short categories, neural recordings reveal that the task is solved through population dynamics akin to motor timing rather than comparison of abstract representations of duration that would be generated by temporal arithmetic[31] . Thus, the use of abstract arithmetic operations for sensory timing may be limited to specific conditions[109] . 

## _**How stable neural trajectories arise**_ 

_**Computational insights.**_ What are the key factors that shape population state dynamics into stable neural trajectories capable of supporting prospective timing? Computational studies using recurrent neural networks to reproduce prospective timing behaviours suggest that the generation of stable trajectories can arise simply through interaction between recurrent dynamics within a local circuit and external sensory input related to the duration[110][–][112] . Specifically, recurrent networks lacking any specialized structure[113] can recapitulate both experimentally observed timing behaviour and neural activity patterns at single-cell and population levels when trained to perform prospective timing tasks. For sensory timing tasks, recurrent networks generate population activity which evolves along a common trajectory to reach specific terminal states for specific durations[31][,][114][–][116] . For motor timing tasks, recurrent networks produce specific 

NATure revIeWS **[|] NeuRoScieNce** 

volume 23[|] November 2022[|] **649** 

Reviews 

**==> picture [411 x 589] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
a b<br>Cell 1 T3 Cell 1<br>T1 T2 T3<br>T1<br>Cell 2 Cell 2 Dimensionality<br>reduction<br>1 2 3 1 2 3 1 2 3 Cell 3<br>Cell no. Cell no. Cell no. ...<br>T2 Cell 3 Cell  N Dim 1<br>c<br>Sensory timing Motor timing Temporal expectation<br>Stimulus start Stimulus end Interval start Interval end Interval start Cue<br>Duration 1 Duration 1<br>Duration 2 Duration 2<br>Duration 3 Duration 3<br>Elapsed time<br>Elapsed time Elapsed time<br>Expectation-<br>related<br>internal state<br>Stimulus<br>end Interval end<br>Stimulus start Interval start Interval start<br>Dim 1 Dim 1 Dim 1<br>d Reward<br>Production epoch<br>t p 1,000<br>Estimation epoch<br>t s<br>800<br>–0.15 0 0.15<br>Go<br>Set ( t p – t s) /  t s 640<br>Ready Ready Set 480<br>Time<br>480 640 800 480 640 800<br>t s (ms) t s (ms)<br>e<br>Ready 800 1 Set + 200 ms<br>0<br>PC3<br>–1<br>Set –1<br>Set<br>0 –1<br>PC3<br>0 480 PC2 PC1 0<br>1<br>1 Go<br>–1<br>PC10 1 –1 0 1<br>PC2<br>Estimation epoch (sensory timing) Production epoch (motor timing)<br>Firing rate Firing rate Firing rate Dim 2<br>Dim 2 Dim 2 Dim 2<br> (ms) t p<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


durations by modulating the speed at which a common trajectory evolves[43][,][115][,][117][,][118] . For temporal expectation, recurrent networks trained on non-timing tasks with fixed temporal structures generate trajectories which not only encode significant temporal information but are also capable of supporting temporal expectation[115] . In further support of the apparent capability of local 

recurrent circuits to generate stable trajectories supporting prospective timing, in vitro studies using stimulation following fixed temporal patterns have found that local circuits are capable of learning these structures and generating stable trajectories[119][,][120] . 

Beyond illustrating that recurrent networks lacking specialized structure are generally capable of performing 

**650**[|] November 2022[|] volume 23 

**www.nature.com/nrn** 

Reviews 

◀ Fig. 2 | **Neural trajectories during prospective timing. a** | The activity of a population of neurons, or population state, at a given moment can be depicted as a point within a state space where each axis corresponds to the firing rate of a specific neuron. In this example, there are three neurons, so the state space is three-dimensional. As the firing rates of the three neurons change across time, so does the population state, tracing out a trajectory, in this case spanning three time points (T1, T2 and T3). **b** | For a population consisting of _N_ cells, the state space is _N_ -dimensional. Dimensionality reduction can be used to reduce noise and to project data onto specific subspaces, and often it is helpful to apply dimensionality reduction techniques to more easily identify important features of neural trajectories. In this cartoon example, dimensionality reduction reveals a simpler trajectory within a two-dimensional space. **c** | Different trajectory features are used for sensory timing, motor timing and temporal expectation. For sensory timing of different durations (indicated by different shades of grey), a common trajectory progresses at a constant speed (starting at a common population state and reaching a common intermediate state over the same amount of elapsed physical time, indicated in blue) but stops at different terminal states for specific durations (indicated by different shades of red). For motor timing of different durations (indicated by different shades of grey), a common trajectory progresses at different speeds (starting at a common population state and reaching different intermediate population states over the same amount of elapsed physical time, indicated in blue) to reach a common terminal state (different durations indicated by different shades of red). For temporal expectation, a trajectory begins to evolve following the start of a fixed temporal structure, and reaches a specific state in accordance with this temporal structure. In the illustrated example, the temporal structure is defined by a cue which occurs at a fixed interval following a start signal, and the trajectory reaches a particular set of states (indicated in purple) at the time of the cue. This expectation-related internal state may then be reflected in an altered response criterion or modulation of sensory representations, for example. **d** | Left, structure of ‘ready, set, go’ sensorimotor timing task. Monkeys are presented with a sample interval _t_ s, which they reproduce as _t_ p through the timing of a motor action. Top centre, reward (green shading) is a function of the relative error between _t_ s and _t_ p. Bottom centre, the set of sample intervals used. Right, behaviour from an example monkey illustrating that animals are able to carry out both sensory timing and motor timing accurately in order to reproduce presented intervals. Dots indicate individual trials, and circles indicate average _t_ p per _t_ s. **e** | Neural trajectories during estimation (left) and production (right) epochs, based on activity recorded from the dorsomedial frontal cortex. These two sets of trajectories illustrate how prospective timing is accomplished through population state dynamics: specific durations are associated either with specific population states along the trajectory (estimation epoch) or specific trajectory speeds (production epoch). Triangles indicate ‘ready’, circles indicate ‘set’, squares indicate ‘go’ and small circles indicate neural states at 40-ms increments. Dim, dimension; PC, principal component. Parts **d** and **e** adapted with permission from reF.[56] , Elsevier. 

prospective timing tasks and that they do so using activity patterns similar to those which have been observed experimentally, these recurrent network models may also provide additional insights into the mechanisms for sensory and motor timing. A key consideration for sensory timing is how external input is able to influence the ongoing progression of the trajectory[121] . Within a recurrent network, if recurrent synaptic weights are sufficiently weak, the network’s ability to propagate activity through recurrent dynamics will be limited, and progression of the trajectory will predominantly be driven by external input. Models based on state-dependent networks[122] demonstrate that networks with weak recurrent weights are in fact capable of performing sensory timing on the subsecond timescale[52][,][122][,][123] . In the case where recurrent weights are not sufficiently weak, however, and the network is able to generate a trajectory on its own, progression of the trajectory can still be influenced by external input as long as the input is sufficiently strong[114] . For motor timing, a central question is how trajectory speed modulation occurs. Speed modulation begins with the influence of duration input on the network that determines which duration should be produced. Assuming 

that duration input is transient, recurrent network models suggest that the influence of this input may occur in a population activity subspace which is orthogonal to the subspace within which the sub sequent recurrent dynamics that drive evolution of the motor timing trajectory play out[43] . When duration input is assumed to be tonic, a similar separation of recurrent dynamics and input into orthogonal subspaces is also observed[117] . Recurrent network models also suggest that within the recurrent dynamics that drive evolution of the trajectory, the speed at which the trajectory evolves may be due to the interaction of duration input with the nonlinear activation functions of single neurons[43] . 

_**Experimental insights.**_ Although local circuits may be capable of generating stable trajectories, experimental observations demonstrate that interareal interactions also play an important role in the generation of stable trajectories. Human functional MRI studies consistently observe that networks of multiple brain areas are activated during prospective timing tasks[2][,][124][–][128] , and specific areas within these networks are often engaged during particular phases of a given task[129][–][133] . Thus, the generation of stable trajectories may arise in part through interaction between multiple brain areas playing different complementary roles[2][,][125] . Single-unit recordings from animals are beginning to provide more detailed insight into what this interaction may look like. Corticostriatal interactions, in particular, may play an important role in prospective timing[17][,][76][,][125] , and several studies recording from both the striatum and the cortex during the same timing task[32][,][36][,][38][,][39][,][134] have observed dissociations which suggest that the striatum may act to refine cortical trajectories representing the passage of time[135][,][136] . In motor timing tasks and sensory timing tasks, respectively, the striatum was found to have greater temporal information than the orbitofrontal cortex[38] or the medial prefrontal cortex[32] . For the dorsolateral striatum in particular, activity was observed to be more sequential than that in either the secondary motor cortex[36] or the medial prefrontal cortex[32] , suggesting that refinement within the dorsolateral striatum may in part be reflected in the generation of trajectories which are primarily defined by sequential activity of cells which fire at specific moments in time within a duration[136] . Consistent with this, in a model trained to generate timed responses using activity patterns from either the dorsolateral striatum or secondary motor cortex as input, striatal input in the form of sequential activity allowed more consistent timing behaviour[36] . However, given that both the striatum and the cortex are composed of distinct areas involved in different functions, whether such refinement of cortical representations of time is a general function that the striatum carries out on the different cortical inputs it receives still remains to be determined. Interactions across areas may reflect the distribution of different computational roles across separate populations of neurons, and similar distribution may also occur across different functionally defined subpopulations of neurons (or subspaces) within a single area such that within-area interactions between specific subpopulations of neurons may also play a role in the generation of stable trajectories[43] . 

NATure revIeWS **[|] NeuRoScieNce** 

volume 23[|] November 2022[|] **651** 

## Reviews 

**==> picture [368 x 231] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
a  Sensory timing   c<br>Interval start Interval end Ramping Sequential activity<br>Cell 1 Cell 3 Cell 1<br>Cell 2 Cell 4<br>Cell 2<br>b  Motor timing Ramping<br>Cell 3<br>Cell 1 Cell 3<br>Cell 2 Cell 4 Cell 4<br>Time (s) Time (s) Time (s)<br>Firing rate<br>Firing rate<br>Firing rate<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


Fig. 3 | **Single-cell activity underlying stable neural trajectories during prospective timing. a** | During sensory timing, single-cell activity evolves along the same pattern for different durations, reaching different end points dependent on the specific duration (two example durations shown here). Grey traces show evolution of activity over the shorter duration, and black traces show the continued evolution of activity for the longer duration. Activity patterns can be complex and non-monotonic, as illustrated by the two example cells in the left column, or ramping, as illustrated by the two example cells in the right column. **b** | During motor timing, single-cell activity exhibits temporal scaling, or stretching of responses for longer durations (black trace compared with grey trace). This scaling occurs both for cells with complex non-monotonic activity patterns, as illustrated by the two example cells in the left column, and for cells with ramping activity, as illustrated in by the two example cells in the right column. **c** | In addition to ramping activity and more complex non-monotonic activity patterns (as in parts **a** and **b** ), single cells (four examples are shown here) can also exhibit peak activity at specific points in time within an interval such that as a population, their peak activity defines a sequence which spans the interval (indicated by the diagonal arrow). 

Interactions with neuromodulatory systems also play a critical role in prospective timing. Manipulation of dopaminergic signalling, in particular, has been shown to generate shifts in duration estimates, which suggest that dopaminergic neurons may control the speed at which neural trajectories evolve[125][,][137][–][141] . Consistent with this, direct recordings of dopaminergic neuron activity in the substantia nigra pars compacta show that their population activity is correlated with animals’ estimates of duration[142][,][143] . Additionally, optogenetic manipulation of the activity of these dopaminergic neurons shifts animals’ duration estimates in a manner consistent with control over the speed of trajectories: increased dopaminergic activity drives overestimation of time and vice versa[142][,][143] . Beyond control of the speed at which trajectories evolve, dopaminergic signalling may also have a substantial influence on the initial formation of trajectories through its role in reinforcement learning[142][,][144][–][147] . In addition to the dopaminergic pathways, cholinergic pathways have also been shown to play an important role in prospective timing. Disruption of cholinergic signalling has a substantial impact on timing behaviour[125][,][137][,][140][,][148] , but this effect typically lags by several sessions following the start of the manipulation, suggesting that its effect is related to memory of the learned intervals and their trajectories, rather than the ongoing evolution of trajectories in the present moment. Additionally, cholinergic input has been shown to be necessary and sufficient 

for learning of reward timing intervals in the primary visual cortex[149][,][150] . Overall, a key question that remains regarding the generation of stable trajectories is whether there exist any general principles spanning sensory timing, motor timing and temporal expectation, or whether this process is instead better understood in terms of the specific individual contexts in which it occurs. 

As we continue to learn more about how stable trajectories arise, one question which may be informative is whether stable trajectories arise specifically for the purpose of timing, or instead for some other function which occurs across time[4][,][151] . It has long been debated whether timing is supported by a dedicated central clock or distributed local representations of time[2][,][5][,][124][,][125][,][152][,][153] , and, if timing is supported by distributed local representations of time reflecting the inherent temporal nature of many different brain functions[152][,][154] , then understanding these functions themselves may also inform us about how representations of time arise. For an area such as the motor cortex where the temporal nature of motor action is inherent, understanding how population state dynamics underlie motor action may be in large part the same as understanding motor timing. A similar overlap may also exist for areas such as the striatum and the frontal cortex which are involved in reward prediction[146][,][147] , given that stable temporal structures are what allow reward prediction to occur. But time is also present in less obvious functions, as illustrated by the example of path integration, 

**652**[|] November 2022[|] volume 23 

**www.nature.com/nrn** 

Reviews 

carried out in part by the hippocampus and the MEC. Path integration is a process defined by movement over time, and the computations generating a representation of elapsed distance may also support the estimation of elapsed time in several ways. First, an explicit representation of both elapsed distance and average velocity over a period of time can be used to directly estimate elapsed time. Elapsed distance by itself may also directly serve as a rough estimate of elapsed time without any additional computation. Second, the central computation for path integration and for estimating elapsed time is similar — counting steps for path integration, and counting units of time for elapsed time — such that the mechanisms which allow path integration to occur may also support estimation of elapsed time[155] . Finally, a central behaviour supported by path integration — homing — shares substantial similarities with the process of prospective timing. In each case, either elapsed time or distance is tracked with respect to a fixed temporal or physical landmark, which is set at the start of the behaviour. Although it remains unclear for both homing and tracking of elapsed time how reference points are set[156][,][157] , the similarity of the computational goal in each case raises the possibility that they may share a similar mechanism. Beyond the computational overlap between prospective timing and path integration, path integration also occurs on longer timescales than the time-related functions of other areas such as the motor cortex or the striatum. Thus, the hippocampus and other areas involved in path integration offer an existing solution to the challenge of estimating duration across different timescales, specifically for longer durations. 

## **Retrospective timing** 

The major difference between prospective timing and retrospective timing is that in prospective timing, the start of the interval is set beforehand, allowing active tracking of the ongoing passage of time (Fig. 1). In contrast, retrospective timing can be computed only from memory of the interval and events occurring within it[158][,][159] , and the main computational goal for retrospective timing is the conversion of memory representations into a duration value. In this way, it is similar to the special instance of sensory timing in which the estimation process is separated in time from the interval being timed. However, for this particular form of sensory timing, it is still possible to generate an explicit representation of the ongoing passage of time and use memory of this explicit temporal information to estimate duration, whereas such a possibility does not exist during retrospective timing. More importantly, a large number of human behavioural experiments explicitly comparing prospective timing and retrospective timing have established that they generate significantly different duration estimates for the same physical time intervals, strongly suggesting that different mechanisms underlie each type of timing. First, in a foundational study by Hicks et al., participants estimated either prospectively (asked before the interval) or retrospectively (asked following the interval) a 42-s duration during which they dealt a deck of cards[160] . The average prospective duration estimate was 42.25 s, while the average retro spective duration estimate was 32.28 s. The temporal delay between the end of the interval and retrospective 

estimation was approximately 15 s, and consisted only of the time it took to ask participants to make the estimate, limiting the potential for poor memory recall to impact retrospective estimates. Subsequent variations of this paradigm across a wide range of conditions have consis tently observed that prospective estimates are longer and tend to be less variable[161][,][162] . Second, acting on the hypo thesis that prospective and retrospective timing engage different cognitive processes, a number of studies have examined the effects of manipulating different cognitive variables and observed dissociations between prospective timing and retrospective timing[161][,][163] . For example, Block et al. modulated participants’ cognitive load by presenting them with a list of words which they either simply had to pay attention to (low-load condition) or had to name an associated action for (high-load condition). Prospective estimates of how long the list presentation lasted under the high-load condition were significantly shorter than prospective estimates under the low-load condition, while retrospective estimates were unaffected by task difficulty and cognitive load[164] . This dissociation is likely to reflect the importance attention to the passage of time plays for prospective timing specifically[165] . 

## _**Immediate and remote retrospective timing**_ 

Just as prospective timing is separated into different types (implicit timing, explicit timing and sensory, motor or temporal expectation), retrospective timing is also likely to encompass more than one type, particularly since the timescales that it encompasses span a few seconds to decades. However, systematic examination of retrospective timing across different timescales to identify these potentially different types remains to be done. Nevertheless, one separate distinction that has been drawn within retrospective timing is between immediate estimation (when estimation directly follows the interval) and remote estimation (when estimation is separated by some delay from the interval). Estimates made immediately following the interval are shorter than those made following a delay[166][–][171] , and this effect is true across a wide range of interval lengths (from tens of seconds to 15 min) as well as delay lengths (from seconds to 1 month). Although it seems plausible that this difference may in part be due to the respective involvement of either short-term memory (for immediate estimation) or long-term memory (for remote estimation), it still remains to be determined whether this difference may be attributed to specific memory processes (for example, memory encoding or memory recall). Several studies additionally show that the length of the delay has an impact on retrospective timing[166][,][167][,][170] , but a more detailed understanding of this interaction is also lacking. Because the categorization of retrospective timing is currently very limited and does not clearly suggest any mechanistic differences between immediate estimation and remote estimation, for the purposes of our discussion, we do not distinguish between different types of retrospective timing. 

## _**Retrospective timing and events**_ 

A simple mechanism for retrospective timing would be to directly encode explicit temporal information (for example, timestamps in physical time) during the 

NATure revIeWS **[|] NeuRoScieNce** 

volume 23[|] November 2022[|] **653** 

Reviews 

## Event segmentation 

The parcellation of continuous ongoing experience into discrete events. 

## Event trajectory 

A neural trajectory defined through the process of event segmentation. 

## Contextual drift 

A dynamic in which representations of context gradually change over time, as a natural result of time-varying inputs. 

initial experience of an interval, such that the time of an event could be directly recalled from memory rather than having to be estimated from the contents of memory later. Although this does happen in some circumstances, the normal mechanism for retrospective timing is instead a reconstructive process that brings together and utilizes temporal information from a number of different sources[158][,][171][–][178] . This point is clearly demonstrated by several studies which observed that retrospective duration estimates for both public and autobiographical events have similar accuracy regardless of whether participants actually remember the events or do not remember them[158][,][173][,][174] . If temporal information was directly retrieved from memory, then duration estimates would necessarily be less accurate for events which were not remembered. Instead, these results suggest that duration can be actively computed using temporal information inferred from the events which constitute an experience[179] , even in the extreme case when the experience is not one’s own. In addition to this inferential construction of temporal information, retrospective timing can also draw on certain explicit forms of temporal information, such as temporal landmarks and temporal schema. Temporal landmarks are events for which temporal information is explicitly attached, such as birthdays or flashbulb memories[177] , and can aid reconstruction in a manner similar to how physical landmarks reduce error during path integration. Temporal information for these particular memories may be retained over time because of their centrality to the experience[180] . Temporal schema are general temporal structures within experience[158] . These can be defined by temporal features, as in the days of the week or the seasons, but they can also be defined by non-temporal features, such as the progression through grade levels of primary school[181][,][182] . 

The events making up an experience also provide a natural source of temporal information, as they both occur across time and define intervals of time. Here we adopt the definition of ‘event’ provided by Zacks and Tversky[183] in the context of event segmentation theory: “a segment of time at a given location that is conceived by an observer to have a beginning and an end.” Many studies have shown that retrospective time estimates are correlated with the number of remembered events from the timed interval[159][,][184][–][189] . Moreover, manipulating the event structure of an experiment (for example, by showing a sequence of stimuli in either random or fixed order) impacts the subsequent estimated duration of the experiment[159][,][184][–][188] . In an illustrative study by Poynter, participants were presented with a list consisting of 27 unrelated words and three high-priority events (last names of US presidents) that they were instructed to pay particular attention to[186] . High-priority events were either placed as the first three items of the list (unsegmented condition) or otherwise distributed approximately evenly across the list (segmented condition). Participants’ retrospective estimates for segmented intervals were longer than their retrospective estimates for unsegmented intervals. Notably, there were no differences in recall or recognition across the two conditions, indicating that the difference in duration estimates was not caused by differences in memory but 

instead reflected the substantial influence that the event structure of the experience (defined by high-priority events) had on retrospective timing. Similarly, additional studies have shown that manipulating event structure more indirectly through changes in context impact the estimated duration. For example, if a basic sequence of events such as the presentation of a list of words occurs within a changing context, the estimated duration will be longer than for the same sequence of events within a constant context. In these studies, context spanned a wide range, from environmental[190][–][192] to cognitive[164][,][193] to emotional[190][,][194][,][195] , and the increase in estimated duration may be interpreted as reflecting the more complex event structure of the experiment. Thus, the event structure of ongoing experience has a defining influence on retrospective timing. 

## _**Neural event trajectories**_ 

The close relation between event structure and retrospective timing suggests that the neural mechanisms underlying the perception of events may also play a critical role in retrospective timing. Human behavioural experiments[196][,][197] and functional imaging experiments[198] examining the process by which events are perceived have established that continuous ongoing experience is segmented into discrete events[183][,][199] . Subsequent stored representations of these discrete events within long-term memory may thus serve as the basis for retrospective timing. Consistent with this, both human behavioural experiments[196][,][200][–][206] and human functional imaging experiments[207][–][210] demonstrate that the temporal units defined during initial online segmentation of an experience have a substantial influence on the structure of subsequent long-term memory for that experience, while the event boundaries determined during initial segmentation subsequently serve as anchors for long-term memory[211][,][212] . Moreover, ongoing experience is in fact simultaneously segmented into events on multiple timescales[183][,][213][–][216] such that the stored representations of all segmented events would be able to flexibly support time estimation across the full range of timescales present within episodic memory. 

Returning to the idea from prospective timing that neural population activity can be used to encode the passage of physical time as long as each moment in time corresponds to a unique neural population activity state, assuming events serve as the basis for retrospective timing, it may likewise be the case that neural population activity can be used for retrospective timing if each event within continuous ongoing experience is represented by a unique neural population state. Accurate retrospective timing across a series of events would then depend on population activity evolving along a trajectory composed of sufficiently distinct population states for each event. We refer to such a trajectory defined through the process of event segmentation as a neural ‘event trajectory’ (Fig. 4a). Many models of episodic memory propose the existence of a similar time-varying temporal context signal, often referred to as ‘contextual drift’, which would allow different episodes of experience to be linked together and organized by temporal order[217][–][220] . Neural event trajectories do not necessarily have to 

**654**[|] November 2022[|] volume 23 

**www.nature.com/nrn** 

Reviews 

**==> picture [299 x 302] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
a Encoding of ongoing<br>experience into memory<br>Event<br>1<br>2<br>3<br>4<br>5<br>Physical time<br>Dimension 2<br>b B1 W1 W2 B2 B3 W3 B4 W4 B5 B6 W5 W6<br>250 s<br>trials<br>Population state for 10 s bin Black walls White walls<br>Mean state for 250 s trial<br>B1 B6 W1 W6<br>LEC CA3 MEC<br>100<br>100<br>50<br>0 0 0<br>–50<br>–100<br>–100<br>–100 0 100 –50 0 50 –50 0 50<br>LD1 LD1 LD1<br>Dimension 1<br>LD2<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


Fig. 4 | **Neural event trajectories encode event structure of experience. a** | An event structure occurring across continuous physical time is encoded by discretized representations in neural population state space reflecting event segmentation. Left, a sequence of events occurs across physical time. Each block corresponds to a constant interval of physical time, different-coloured blocks correspond to different events and shading of blocks corresponds to the progression of a given event across physical time. Right, the neural population states evoked during the sequence of events. Each dot corresponds to the population state defined over a constant interval of physical time, different-coloured dots correspond to different events and shading of dots corresponds to the progression of a given event across physical time. Arrows illustrate the progression of the event trajectory, with shading indicating the progression of physical time. Neural population activity is shown in a two-dimensional population activity space. Discretized representations arise in part through the greater rate of change of population states around event boundaries, which may be driven by a combination of changes in the external environment as well as internal states. The event trajectory defined across the overall sequence of events can be used for retrospective timing. **b** | Visualization of dimensionality-reduced population activity in the lateral entorhinal cortex (LEC), hippocampus (CA3) and the medial entorhinal cortex (MEC) allows observation of event trajectories. Dimensionality reduction was performed by means of linear discriminant analysis. Axes correspond to the first two linear discriminants (LD1 and LD2). During a session rats foraged freely in an environment whose wall colour switched between black and white over 12 trials, each approximately 250 s long, interleaved with intertrial periods outside the environment. The generation of distinct population states for each individual trial period in the LEC but not CA3 may reflect event segmentation on different timescales in each respective area. Panel **b** reprinted from reF.[241] , Springer Nature Limited. 

evolve gradually[221] and are separate[222] from ‘representational drift’, which is not driven by the event structure of ongoing experience. Finally, just as how a linear metrical representation is not required for neural trajectories supporting prospective timing, event trajectories also do not imply a literal timestamping of events such that the specific population state associated with a given event directly indicates when it happened in physical time. 

## _**Evidence for event trajectories**_ 

_**Human functional imaging.**_ A number of human functional imaging experiments provide evidence that event trajectories occur and influence retrospective timing. Jenkins and Ranganath presented participants with a sequence of objects and subsequently asked them in a surprise test afterwards to indicate when specific objects had appeared during the overall sequence[223] . They found that in the prefrontal cortex, neural population states became increasingly dissimilar as the experiment progressed. Moreover, the dissimilarity between a given object and temporally adjacent objects was greater for those objects whose time of occurrence was accurately estimated. Thus, if the initial presentation of each object is taken as a discrete event, accurate retrospective timing was dependent on the representation of each event being sufficiently distinct. Using a similar paradigm, Ezzyat and Davachi presented participants with sequences of visual objects placed over a background that either remained constant or changed within a sequence, thus defining a putative event boundary[209] . After each sequence, participants were asked to judge whether two of the objects from the sequence were close together or far apart in time. Whether the two objects spanned an event boundary was variable, but the actual temporal distance was kept constant. Similar to the findings of Jenkins and Ranganath, population states in both the hippocampus and object-selective visual cortex were less similar across pairs that were judged as far apart (Fig. 5a). Taking a more naturalistic approach, Nielson et al. used participants’ own individual memories of autobiographical events to examine the relationship between neural activity during remote recall of these events and the actual physical durations between them when they were originally experienced[224] . For a month, participants wore a smartphone that would take photographs and record the time and location at regular intervals. At the end of the month, participants were imaged while recalling experiences cued by logged photographs. Once again, the amount of time separating two events when they were originally experienced was correlated with how different their respective population states were during subsequent recall (Fig. 5b). This correlation was present in the hippocampus but only for events which the participants could recall and was altogether absent from the primary visual cortex, probably reflecting the fact that these population states are generated through episodic memory recall. 

The aforementioned studies each involved behaviours that do not necessarily engage retrospective timing specifically but are still at the very least closely related. Lositsky et al. combined functional imaging with an explicit retrospective timing task. Participants first listened to a 25-min long story and then were asked to make estimates of how much time spanned different pairs of clips from the story[225] . Consistent with findings of the other studies using simpler stimuli, larger changes in population state during the initial encoding of the story subsequently resulted in more accurate duration estimates. However, because the event structure of the story was more complex and in part subjective, Lositsky et al. could also examine whether the perceived event 

NATure revIeWS **[|] NeuRoScieNce** 

volume 23[|] November 2022[|] **655** 

Reviews 

structures of individual participants were correlated with their retrospective duration estimates. Lositsky et al. asked participants to mark event boundaries, and found that the number of marked boundaries was in fact correlated with duration estimates, providing a direct 

link across event perception, event trajectories and retrospective timing altogether. 

There have been very few computational models for retrospective timing[226] , but recent work from Fountas et al. demonstrates that an event-based model for retrospective 

**==> picture [408 x 344] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
a Encoding Left hippocampus b<br>Changing scene<br>(event boundary)<br>4 s 6<br>5<br>4<br>Constant scene<br>Physical 3<br>time 2<br>0.10<br>1<br>P < 0.025<br>0<br>1 day 1 week 1 month<br>Temporal distance test 0.05<br>log10(time)<br>Rate temporal proximity:<br>0.00<br>‘Close’ ‘Far’<br>Very close/close/far/very far –0.05<br>c<br>Encoding of ongoing Reinstatement of population Convert neural distances into<br>experience into memory states from memory subjective duration estimates<br>d 1 d 1<br>d 2<br>d 2<br>Dimension 1 Dimension 1<br>Neural distance<br>) z<br>Pattern correlation (<br>Dimension 2 Dimension 2<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


Fig. 5 | **Relation between duration estimates and event trajectories. a** | Left, structure of associative encoding task. During an initial encoding phase, human participants were presented with multiple sequences of four images consisting of a face or object simulus placed over a scene, which either remained constant or changed after two images, thus defining an event boundary. Subsequently, they were presented with a pair of items (face or object) from the encoding phase and asked to judge how close together in time they appeared during encoding, using a scale of ‘very close’, ‘close’, ‘far’ and ‘very far’. Temporal distance estimates reflected subjective time estimates, as object pairs were always separated by a constant physical temporal distance. Right, with use of functional MRI, hippocampal activity was measured during the encoding phase. Similarity of population states was lower for pairs judged to be temporally far apart than for pairs judged to be close in time, demonstrating that subjective estimates of time are related to population states arising during initial encoding of experience. **b** | Measurement of the similarity of neural population states during recall of past events occurring over a time span of 1 month (using human functional imaging) reveals that population states for events become increasingly more separated with increased temporal distance. Thus, retrospective timing based on population states from reinstated event trajectories is, in principle, capable of being accurate with respect to the actual physical duration. Each individual blue dot indicates the neural distance for a pair of events, black lines indicate regressions for individual participants of neural distance against the logarithm of physical temporal distance and the red line indicates the average of these regressions across participants. **c** | During retrospective timing, population states from an event trajectory arising during the initial encoding of experience (left) are reinstated (centre) and subjective duration is estimated by a process in which some feature defined across the reinstated population states (for example, distance in population state space) is converted into units of physical time (right). Left, each coloured circle corresponds to the population state defined across a constant amount of physical time, such that events which span longer intervals of physical time correspond to a greater number of circles and the shading of circles indicates the progression of physical time across an individual event. Arrows illustrate the progression of the event trajectory, with shading indicating the progression of physical time. Centre, each circle corresponds to the recalled population state for a given event. The dashed lines indicate potential durations that could be estimated between pairs of events, and the solid lines indicate the two specific durations ( _d_ 1 and _d_ 2) which are being estimated and compared. Part **a** adapted with permission from reF.[209] , Elsevier. Part **b** adapted with permission from reF.[224] , PNAS. 

**656**[|] November 2022[|] volume 23 

**www.nature.com/nrn** 

Reviews 

timing is able to reproduce key features of human retrospective timing[227] . Behavioural data for retrospective timing were generated by presenting participants with a video of a natural scene and then asking them to estimate its duration. The same video was then presented to a neural network trained to perform image classification, and the frame-by-frame unit activations were recorded across different layers of the network to simulate event trajectories across different brain areas, as might be measured by functional imaging. The number of salient events (defined as events poorly predicted by a generative model) was then used to generate a duration estimate. Using this computational approach (previously proposed by Roseboom et al.[228] ) to explicitly test the relation between events and the estimated duration of an experience, Fountas et al. found that the model not only generated accurate duration estimates but also recapitulated several well-established human estimation biases, including the judgement of scenes with more events as longer than scenes with fewer events, despite both being of the same physical duration. 

_**Single-cell recordings.**_ Single-cell recordings from animals may allow us to gain a more detailed mechanistic understanding of event trajectory dynamics and the underlying process for event segmentation within the context of retrospective timing. However, whereas many well-established experimental paradigms exist for studying prospective timing in animals, experimental paradigms for retrospective timing are still at a more nascent stage[229][–][231] . Retrospective timing is ideally studied using a one-shot paradigm in which subjects are completely unaware of the timing task until after the stimulus duration has been presented, thus ensuring that no attention can be explicitly focused on the passage of time and the influence of processes for estimating present duration can be minimized. This is challenging in animal experiments due to the inability to directly ask animals to make time estimations[232] — in the vast majority of experimental paradigms, animals must learn how to respond over repeated trials, and in doing so may also learn to pay attention to the passage of time. Nevertheless, a number of studies have established behavioural paradigms which capture a key element of retrospective timing in that animals cannot predict when to begin timing or what specific temporal features to pay attention to a priori[229][–][231][,][233][–][235] . One paradigm, first developed using scrub jays[229] , is to associate different temporal characteristics with specific food items (for example, different types of food that spoil at different durations). Animals are allowed to forage for this food and are observed to see whether they make use of this temporal information across different time points. Because the foraging time points occur at intervals determined by the experimenter, the animals cannot pre-emptively time their behaviour such that they explicitly attend to the passage of time. Additionally, both the longer time intervals used in these experiments, spanning up to multiple days, and the engagement of animals’ natural foraging strategies, allowing them to learn the task across relatively few trials, may limit the likelihood that animals learn to track time explicitly for the task. 

Given the close link between retrospective timing and episodic memory, many animal studies[236][–][241] have 

taken an alternative approach to understanding retrospective timing, studying it in the context of episodic memory and focusing on the medial temporal lobe. The medial temporal lobe has long been a point of focus for studies of episodic memory using single-cell recordings in animals[242][–][245] , and the results from human functional imaging studies[209][,][223][,][225][,][246][,][247] provide evidence that the mechanisms for retrospective timing not only involve structures within the medial temporal lobe but are also likely to overlap with the mechanisms for event segmentation and episodic memory. However, this approach does make a critical assumption that the representation of time used for retrospective timing is present regardless of whether animals actually engage in explicit retrospective timing. This is in part justified by the fact that retrospective timing occurs, by definition, without initial explicit awareness of the importance of tracking time and is inherently post hoc. 

As a starting point for understanding the dynamics of event trajectories in more detail, a number of studies have examined how population states in the hippocampus and the entorhinal cortex change over time as animals explore a constant environment[236][–][238][,][240][,][241][,][248][–][250] . Establishing the general paradigm for these studies, Mankin et al. recorded from both CA1 and CA3 while animals freely foraged within an open field environment. The temporal structure of the experiment was such that animals would forage for four 10-min trials, once in the morning and once in the afternoon six hours later, and animals would repeat this temporal structure daily for up to a month. Within CA1, Mankin et al. observed that the correlation between pairs of population vectors defined at different time points decreased as a function of temporal distance, reflecting the evolution of CA1 activity along an event trajectory where events were defined by the trial structure of the experiment. Given that the same temporal structure was repeated across days, animals could potentially have learned this structure implicitly through temporal expectation processes, generating a neural trajectory that would similarly exhibit continuous change over a day. However, when looking across days, Mankin et al. found that event trajectories continued to evolve such that population states across days could also be easily differentiated, suggesting that at least in CA1, individual days of the same repeated experimental structure were treated as unique. Other studies using similar experimental paradigms with fixed temporal structures and free foraging repeated across days have also observed event trajectories continue to evolve across days, while failing to observe repeated stable neural trajectories corresponding to the repeated temporal structures[112][,][241] . 

Across the hippocampal subfields, event trajectories evolve at different rates. The rate of evolution is fastest in CA2, allowing time points separated by a few hours to be easily distinguished[237] , whereas the rate of evolution is slower in CA1, allowing time points separated by a day to be easily distinguished[237][,][238] . In CA3 and the dentate gyrus, population states across days remain largely constant[237][,][238][,][240][,][248] , suggesting that the repeated experiments across days may not be clearly differentiated as separate events. However, there is evidence that evolution of event trajectories in the dentate gyrus may 

NATure revIeWS **[|] NeuRoScieNce** 

volume 23[|] November 2022[|] **657** 

Reviews 

occur on much longer timescales such that time points separated by several weeks become distinguishable[240] . The hippocampus receives most of its cortical input from the entorhinal cortex, which comprises a medial subdivision and a lateral subdivision[251] , and event trajectories have also been observed in the lateral entorhinal cortex[241] (LEC) but not the MEC[236][,][241] (Fig. 4b), which does not differentiate between repeated experiences within the same physical environment. The rate of evolution in the LEC is faster than that in CA2 such that time points separated by minutes are easily distinguishable[241] , and this difference suggests that the entorhinal cortex and hippocampus may each represent experience on a different timescale. 

Single-cell recordings have also observed several neural correlates of event segmentation. Event boundaries are the defining feature of event segmentation, and beginning with the initial study of event segmentation using human functional imaging by Zacks et al.[198] , numerous studies have observed increased activity around event boundaries[198][,][213][,][252][–][254] . Single-cell recordings from both rats[241][,][255] and humans[256] have similarly observed altered population state dynamics following event boundaries, as population states change at a much greater rate immediately following event boundaries (Fig. 4b). Whereas in human experiments event boundaries can be directly reported, event boundaries in experiments using rats require the assumption that a sufficiently salient change, such as being physically transferred between environments, is perceived as an event boundary. In one study where event boundaries were defined more subtly by unannounced rule shifts, hippocampal representations for these event boundaries were not observed[257] . Representation of event boundaries extends down to the single-cell level, as cells which specifically fire following event boundaries have been observed in both rats[255] and humans[256] . Recording from the hippocampus, parahippocampal gyrus and amygdala of human patients, Zheng et al. presented participants with a number of different video clips which had no boundaries (one continuous video shot), soft boundaries (cuts to a new scene in the same video) or hard boundaries (cuts to a new scene in a different video) and found cells which responded immediately after either hard boundaries alone, or hard and soft boundaries. In addition to cells with activity tied to event boundaries, cells potentially representing event identify have also been observed. Sun et al. trained animals to run four laps around a track in order to receive a reward at a fixed reward site[258] , and found that many place cells in CA1 maintained the same firing location for each lap but modulated their firing rate depending on the lap number. Thus, separate events corresponding to separate laps were encoded by single units through differences in the firing rate. In addition to the aforementioned cells, which show transient increases in activity, cells with ramping activity set to event boundaries have also been observed[241] ; although these cells exhibit time-varying activity, they do not appear to be the primary driver of event trajectories, as clear differentiation of individual events is still possible when they are removed from analysis. 

## _**How neural event trajectories arise**_ 

The substantial influence of event structure on retrospective timing implies that part of understanding the mechanisms for retrospective timing involves understanding the mechanisms for how events are segmented. Existing work suggests that event boundaries arise either as part of an active process of perception in which violations of internal predictive models of the current ongoing event define event boundaries[259][,][260] or as an inherent property of the context within which experience occurs[211][,][261][,][262] (for example, entering a new room generates an event boundary[201] ). Recent functional imaging experiments by Baldassano et al. demonstrate that activity patterns across the brain reflect the segmentation of ongoing experience into discrete chunks at different timescales[213] . In lower-order sensory areas, these chunks were only a few seconds long, whereas in higher-order areas, such as the angular gyrus, these chunks could be more than 1 min long. Importantly, the shorter-timescale event boundaries from lower-order areas aligned with the longer-timescale event boundaries of higher-order areas, suggesting that across the cortical processing hierarchy, shorter-timescale chunks are bound together to form longer-timescale chunks, which eventually reach the level of discrete events defining the narrative level of episodic experience[213][,][214][,][263] . Consistent with this, Baldassano et al. also observed that human-annotated event boundaries most closely matched event boundaries defined by activity from higher-order areas, while the degree of matching also increased across the processing hierarchy. Earlier in the processing hierarchy, segmentation of ongoing experience may largely be due to the temporal structure of the external environment and the sensory stimuli it provides, while increasing timescales across the hierarchy of sensory areas may reflect the formation of bound sensory representations for external stimuli such as objects and scenes. At the level of the medial temporal lobe, these representations across different sensory streams may then be integrated to generate a multimodal representation of ongoing experience whose temporal structure may then be refined in higher-order areas. 

The initial generation of a multimodal representation of experience may occur in the LEC, which has been proposed to encode the experiential content of episodic memories[264] , and both anatomical and functional data suggest this possibility. Anatomically, the LEC is one of the major hubs for cortical input across the entire brain, receiving input from an extremely diverse range of cortical structures[265][–][268] , and is the primary structure through which integrated multimodal information may reach the hippocampus[251][,][266][,][269][,][270] . Functionally, LEC neurons generally respond to a wide range of stimuli and associations[241][,][271][–][282] , consistent with a role in binding multimodal representations, and many LEC cells encode information about external features, both sensory and non-sensory, within an egocentric reference frame[282] , which episodic memory is typically perceived through. Notably, data from two human functional imaging studies suggest that entorhinal cortex activity[225] and LEC activity specifically[247] during the initial encoding of ongoing experience may be particularly important 

**658**[|] November 2022[|] volume 23 

**www.nature.com/nrn** 

Reviews 

for later retrospective timing. This may be due to the initial representation of ongoing experience generated within the LEC being used as a default source of temporal information. Downstream of the LEC, the functions of pattern separation and pattern completion carried out by the hippocampal subfields[283] may serve as natural mechanisms for segmentation of entorhinal input into episodic events. The fact that hippocampal activity has often been observed at the end of events may reflect a combination of this process and consolidation mechanisms for encoding these events into long-term memory[213][,][253][,][284][–][287] . Importantly, all of these processes for event segmentation and the storage of event representations in long-term memory define the major source of temporal information for retrospective timing. 

## _**How neural event trajectories are used**_ 

Although we know a good deal about the dynamics of hippocampal population activity during the initial encoding of experiences, how these dynamics may subsequently be used to actually estimate retrospective duration remains essentially unknown, in large part owing to a lack of experiments directly examining this question. As a starting point, however, it seems unlikely that the mechanisms for the actual estimation process during retrospective timing would be exactly the same as those observed during prospective timing. The most salient difference between retrospective timing and prospective timing is that the estimation of duration is a process separate from the initial encoding of events defining the duration (outside certain instances of sensory timing which also contain this separation). Because of this separation, population state dynamics during the initial experience offer only limited insight into the subsequent estimation process even though they may form the basis for subsequent duration estimation — retrospective estimation of duration cannot be described simply in terms of the terminal state of a trajectory or the speed at which a trajectory progresses. Indeed, even if the trajectory corresponding to an interval were recalled and replayed in a temporally compressed manner, as has been observed in the hippocampus in other non-temporal contexts[288] , the trajectory’s speed or terminal state alone would not be sufficient — either of these features would still need to be converted into a duration value. 

If we assume that neural event trajectories during initial encoding of an experience are recalled[253][,][256][,][284][,][286][,][289][–][293] and used for subsequent estimation of retrospective duration, then understanding the estimation process becomes a question of how event trajectories can be used to generate a duration magnitude (Fig. 5c). This process would be straightforward if event trajectories within the hippocampus progressed in a linear manner, as suggested by initial observations[238] : the difference between population states at the start and the end of an interval would directly correlate with physical duration. However, because event trajectories are driven by representations of ongoing events and can often exhibit abrupt nonlinear changes due to non-temporal factors, they are likely to be unsuitable as a linear metric of physical time. Illustrating this point, the amount by which hippocampal population states change across two 

different environments experienced within the same day is larger than the amount by which they change across 2 weeks within the same environment[294] . 

Psychological models of memory for time have provided a number of different hypotheses about how temporal information may be stored and used[158][,][219][,][226][,][295][,][296] . Among these, a temporal context model based on the Laplace transform of event history is of particular importance, offering a potentially simple explanation for how event trajectories can be used to estimate duration[297][–][299] . In this model, each individual event generates a sequence of activity within a specific subpopulation of cells such that a representation of the event persists across the amount of physical time that the sequence takes. Individual cells within this sequence receive input from a set of leaky integrators, and the time at which they fire is determined by the time constants of these inputs. When multiple events occur close together in time, they generate multiple different sequences across the overall population which may or may not overlap with each other depending on the temporal distance between the events. Altogether then, these sequences provide a readout of recent events and their temporal history. 

Most importantly with regard to retrospective timing, because a common set of time constants defines how the sequence of activity for any event progresses in physical time, a temporal metric is defined by the distribution of these time constants. Thus, specific population states (corresponding to specific events) across the overall popu lation define specific moments in physical time, and the magnitude of differences in population state approximates durations in physical time. Extension of the model to describe specifically how retrospective timing may be carried out still remains to be done, but in broad terms, estimation could be accomplished by counting the number of changes in population state, similar to evidence accumulation processes[22] , by comparison of population states (for example, through repetition suppression of match enhancement mechanisms[300] ) or by some means of converting the output of a pattern separation function into a magnitude. Notably, the model is able to reproduce behavioural phenomena observed during free memory recall (recency and contiguity effects)[297][,][298] , bolstering its relevance to memory for time. Additionally, in terms of being biologically realistic, it uses representations which effectively take the form of experimentally observed time cells[69][,][70] and ramping temporal context cells[88][,][241][,][301] , although it should be noted that whether time cells actually encode past event history still remains to be fully verified, as time cells within existing experiments could also be explained in terms of prospective timing mechanisms. 

Although evidence from human functional imaging demonstrates that temporal information about duration may be present within the hippocampus[302][,][303] , the actual computation of duration may ultimately be performed outside the hippocampus[304][,][305] . We have focused on how duration may be estimated from event trajectories, but there is also a role within retrospective timing for temporal landmarks and schema, particularly in cases where events are not contiguous and span multiple experiences. How these different types of temporal information are together used in the estimation process still remains to be 

NATure revIeWS **[|] NeuRoScieNce** 

volume 23[|] November 2022[|] **659** 

Reviews 

understood, and overall our understanding of the mechanisms for actual estimation of retrospective duration still remain very limited, but experiments examining these questions are beginning to be conducted[306][,][307] . 

## _**Neural event trajectories and order**_ 

Although we have focused solely on the estimation of duration, timing based on memory of past events also encompasses the temporal order of events, which has been a larger focus of study[211][,][308][–][310] . Within episodic memory, it is notably temporal order which plays the critical role in defining the narrative structure of experience[311] — the relative duration of events and the temporal distance between them are often secondary — and evidence from a number of studies[210][,][246][,][256][,][309][,][312][–][315] suggests that temporal information related to order is also drawn from event trajectories and is influenced by the process of event segmentation. The hippocampus in particular may play an important role in this process, as the ubiquity with which it generates sequential activity, including in non-spatial contexts[316][–][320] , suggests an intrinsic capability for representing order[93] . In one of the first studies observing event trajectories, Manns et al. recorded from the hippocampus of rats engaged in an odour sequence memory task in which rats were presented in each trial with a sequences of five odours and had to indicate which of two test odours from the sequence occurred earlier[314] . In trials where rats accurately judged order, the population states for odours which were farther apart in the initial sequence were less similar (that is, their representations were more distinct), while this effect was not present in trials where rats incorrectly judged order. Similarly, the event boundary-responsive cells recorded from human patients by Zheng et al. were also predictive of subsequent order memory, as they exhibited significantly reduced activity in trials where temporal order was incorrectly remembered[256] . Using a paradigm similar to that used by Manns et al., Cox et al. presented mice with a single sequence of five odours and then tested them with two of the odours, taking advantage of the animals’ natural instinct to explore the odour presented earlier in the sequence more and thereby removing the need for a trained behavioural response[315] . Inactivation of CA3 and the LEC but not the MEC impacted encoding of temporal order, again suggesting that in addition to the hippocampus, the LEC may also play a key role in the representation of events and driving the evolution of event trajectories. 

## **Interaction between timing mechanisms** 

Although prospective timing and retrospective timing may arise through different mechanisms, they are not entirely isolated from each other. Within the context of learning and memory consolidation, each may influence the other. First, the learning of temporal structure for prospective timing may in certain instances reflect the transformation of temporal information within episodic memory into semantic knowledge[321][,][322] . In this case, the first experience of a sequence of events with stable temporal structure generates a trajectory through popu lation activity space which reflects the salient features of the experience that drive event segmentation. The encoding 

of subsequent repeated experiences with the same sequence of events builds on the recalled trajectory of the initial experience, but the stable temporal structure allows learning and memory consolidation mechanisms to shape the neural trajectory to evolve in a reproducible manner which can support prospective timing. Several studies provide observations consistent with this scenario. In experiments recording from ensembles of single neurons in human patients, the population states observed during initial experience are in part reinstated during subsequent recall[256][,][289][,][291] . Separately, Tsao et al. observed that when animals switched between free foraging behaviour in an open field and temporally structured lap running in a maze, the same population of LEC neurons could generate unique event trajectories during free foraging and repeated stable trajectories during stereotyped lap running[241] . Human functional imaging studies provide similar evidence that the entorhinal cortex is capable of generating both event trajectories during episodic experience[225] and stable trajectories during repeated experience of a fixed event structure[323] . Thus, the activity of a population of entorhinal neurons would, in principle, be able to transform from an initially unique trajectory shaped by a single experience into a repeatable trajectory determined by the stable temporal features of that experience (that is, similar to hippocampal time cells), although such a transformation still remains to be directly observed through time-lapse recordings. Second, the repeated experience of stable temporal structures can lead to not just the learning of stable neural trajectories supporting prospective timing but also temporal schema. Over extended periods in which multiple experiences are framed within a constant temporal structure, a temporal schema can arise as this structure is extracted from the different experiences. The fact that childrens’ ability to estimate duration using memory of past events develops gradually[181][,][182] , progressing on a timescale from a single day to months to years as children gain more and more experience with stable temporal structures of increasing length, may be related to this process. The use of temporal schema within retrospective timing may explain how subjective duration estimates for different groups of events spanning the same physical duration may vastly differ[324] , and human functional imaging studies are now beginning to examine how temporal schema are formed and used[313][,][325][–][329] . Temporal schema may also structure abstract representations of time, thus allowing mental time travel. In a recent study, human participants first learned a list of events and their dates, and then on individual trials imagined themselves at a specific timepoint in the past, present or future and were asked whether a particular event from the learned list was before or after this imagined position. Magnetoencephalographic recordings from participants revealed increased activity in medial temporal lobe structures throughout the trial, during both the initial imagined self-projection in time and the subsequent determination of temporal order[330][,][331] . Such mental time travel has been proposed to require an allocentric-to-egocentric conversion[332] , and the allocentric representation of time supporting this may be built up through temporal schema. 

**660**[|] November 2022[|] volume 23 

**www.nature.com/nrn** 

Reviews 

Finally, going backwards from prospective timing to retrospective timing, learned temporal schema may directly influence the processes underlying event segmentation and the online processing of experience. Recent work provides evidence that learning temporal structure through repeated viewings of a video clip can shift neural activity initially tied to event boundaries forwards in time such that event boundaries are anticipated by neural activity[333] . In a similar fashion, it may be possible for existing temporal schema to alter neural activity online in anticipation of future events. 

## **Conclusions** 

In this Review, we have focused on how temporal information is represented and used during prospective and retrospective timing. For prospective timing, temporal information is encoded within stable neural trajectories, whereas for retrospective timing, temporal information 

is encoded within neural event trajectories, which are a result of the event segmentation process. The subsequent ways in which these two representations of temporal information are used to generate duration estimates are relatively distinct. Prospective duration is directly embedded within the evolution of the stable trajectories, as features defined by the evolution of these trajectories are associated with specific durations, whereas retrospective duration must be separately computed using reinstated population states from event trajectories. Although the mechanisms for prospective and retrospective timing are distinct, the two separate representations of temporal information arising from them — stable trajectories and event trajectories — are likely to interact bidirectionally with each other. 

## Published online 12 September 2022 

1. Buhusi, C. V. & Meck, W. H. What makes us tick? Functional and neural mechanisms of interval timing. _Nat. Rev. Neurosci._ **6** , 755–765 (2005). 

2. Merchant, H., Harrington, D. L. & Meck, W. H. Neural basis of the perception and estimation of time. _Annu. Rev. Neurosci._ **36** , 313–336 (2013). 

3. Grondin, S. Timing and time perception: a review of recent behavioral and neuroscience findings and theoretical directions. _Atten. Percept. Psychophys._ **72** , 561–582 (2010). 

4. Gibbon, J., Malapani, C., Dale, C. L. & Gallistel, C. R. Toward a neurobiology of temporal cognition: advances and challenges. _Curr. Opin. Neurobiol._ **7** , 170–184 (1997). 

5. Ivry, R. B. & Schlerf, J. E. Dedicated and intrinsic models of time perception. _Trends Cogn. Sci._ **12** , 273–280 (2008). 

6. Eichenbaum, H. Time cells in the hippocampus: a new dimension for mapping memories. _Nat. Rev. Neurosci._ **15** , 732–744 (2014). 

7. Gallistel, C. R. _The Organization of Learning_ (The MIT Press, 1990). 

8. Teki, S., Gu, B. M. & Meck, W. H. The persistence of memory: how the brain encodes time in memory. _Curr. Opin. Behav. Sci._ **17** , 178–185 (2017). 

9. Fraisse, P. _The Psychology of Time_ (Harper & Row, 1963). 

10. Fraisse, P. Perception and estimation of time. _Annu. Rev. Psychol._ **35** , 1–37 (1984). 

11. Creelman, C. D. Human discrimination of auditory duration. _J. Acoust. Soc. Am._ **34** , 582–593 (1962). 

12. Treisman, M. Temporal discrimination and the indifference interval: implications for a model of the “internal clock”. _Psychol. Monogr. Gen. Appl._ **77** , 1–31 (1963). 

13. Gibbon, J., Church, R. M. & Meck, W. H. Scalar timing in memory. _Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci._ **423** , 52–77 (1984). 

14. Reppert, S. M. & Weaver, D. R. Coordination of circadian timing in mammals. _Nature_ **418** , 935–941 (2002). 

15. Welsh, D. K., Logothetis, D. E., Meister, M. & Reppert, S. M. Individual neurons dissociated from rat suprachiasmatic nucleus express independently phased circadian firing rhythms. _Neuron_ **14** , 697–706 (1995). 

16. Miall, C. The storage of time intervals using oscillating neurons. _Neural Comput._ **1** , 359–371 (1989). 

17. Matell, M. S. & Meck, W. H. Cortico-striatal circuits and interval timing: coincidence detection of oscillatory processes. _Brain Res. Cogn. Brain Res._ **21** , 139–170 (2004). 

18. Gu, B. M., van Rijn, H. & Meck, W. H. Oscillatory multiplexing of neural population codes for interval timing and working memory. _Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev._ **48** , 160–185 (2015). 

19. Bartolo, R., Prado, L. & Merchant, H. Information processing in the primate basal ganglia during sensory-guided and internally driven rhythmic tapping. _J. Neurosci._ **34** , 3910 (2014). 

20. Kononowicz, T. W. & Rijn, H. V. Single trial beta oscillations index time estimation. _Neuropsychologia_ **75** , 381–389 (2015). 

21. Kononowicz, T. W., Roger, C. & van Wassenhove, V. Temporal metacognition as the decoding of 

self-generated brain dynamics. _Cereb. Cortex_ **29** , 4366–4380 (2018). 

22. Balcı, F. & Simen, P. A decision model of timing. _Curr. Opin. Behav. Sci._ **8** , 94–101 (2016). 

23. Buonomano, D. V. & Laje, R. Population clocks: motor timing with neural dynamics. _Trends Cogn. Sci._ **14** , 520–527 (2010). 

24. Buonomano, D. V. & Mauk, M. D. Neural network model of the cerebellum: temporal discrimination and the timing of motor responses. _Neural Comput._ **6** , 38–55 (1994). 

25. Remington, E. D., Egger, S. W., Narain, D., Wang, J. & Jazayeri, M. A dynamical systems perspective on flexible motor timing. _Trends Cogn. Sci._ **22** , 938–952 (2018). 

26. Coull, J. T. & Nobre, A. C. Dissociating explicit timing from temporal expectation with fMRI. _Curr. Opin. Neurobiol._ **18** , 137–144 (2008). 

27. Zelaznik, H. N., Spencer, R. M. C. & Ivry, R. B. Dissociation of explicit and implicit timing in repetitive tapping and drawing movements. _J. Exp. Psychol._ 

_Hum. Percept. Perform._ **28** , 575–588 (2002). 

28. Ivry, R. B., Spencer, R. M., Zelaznik, H. N. & Diedrichsen, J. The cerebellum and event timing. _Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci._ **978** , 302–317 (2002). 

29. Kim, J., Ghim, J.-W., Lee, J. H. & Jung, M. W. Neural correlates of interval timing in rodent prefrontal cortex. _J. Neurosci._ **33** , 13834–13847 (2013). 

**This study demonstrates that sensory timing can be carried out by evolution of a common neural trajectory reaching different terminal states for different physical durations** . 

30. Gouvêa, T. S. et al. Striatal dynamics explain duration judgments. _Elife_ **4** , e11386 (2015). 

31. Mendoza, G., Méndez, J. C., Pérez, O., Prado, L. & Merchant, H. Neural basis for categorical boundaries in the primate pre-SMA during relative categorization of time intervals. _Nat. Commun._ **9** , 1098 (2018). 

32. Kim, J., Kim, D. & Jung, M. W. Distinct dynamics of striatal and prefrontal neural activity during temporal discrimination. _Front. Integr. Neurosci._ **12** , 34 (2018). 

33. Shimbo, A., Izawa, E.-I. & Fujisawa, S. Scalable representation of time in the hippocampus. _Sci. Adv._ 

   - **7** , eabd7013 (2021). 

34. Mita, A., Mushiake, H., Shima, K., Matsuzaka, Y. & Tanji, J. Interval time coding by neurons in the presupplementary and supplementary motor areas. _Nat. Neurosci._ **12** , 502–507 (2009). 

35. Mello, G. B., Soares, S. & Paton, J. J. A scalable population code for time in the striatum. _Curr. Biol._ **25** , 1113–1122 (2015). 

36. Zhou, S., Masmanidis, S. C. & Buonomano, D. V. Neural sequences as an optimal dynamical regime for the readout of time. _Neuron_ https://doi.org/10.1016/ j.neuron.2020.08.020 (2020). 

37. Xu, M., Zhang, S. Y., Dan, Y. & Poo, M. M. Representation of interval timing by temporally scalable firing patterns in rat prefrontal cortex. _Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA_ **111** , 480–485 (2014). 

38. Bakhurin, K. I. et al. Differential encoding of time by prefrontal and striatal network dynamics. _J. Neurosci._ **37** , 854 (2017). 

39. Emmons, E. B. et al. Rodent medial frontal control of temporal processing in the dorsomedial striatum. 

   - _J. Neurosci._ **37** , 8718–8733 (2017). 

40. Maimon, G. & Assad, J. A. A cognitive signal for the proactive timing of action in macaque LIP. _Nat. Neurosci._ **9** , 948–955 (2006). 

41. Churchland, M. M. et al. Neural population dynamics during reaching. _Nature_ **487** , 51–56 (2012). 

42. Modi, M. N., Dhawale, A. K. & Bhalla, U. S. CA1 cell activity sequences emerge after reorganization of network correlation structure during associative learning. _Elife_ **3** , e01982 (2014). 

43. Wang, J., Narain, D., Hosseini, E. A. & Jazayeri, M. Flexible timing by temporal scaling of cortical responses. _Nat. Neurosci._ **21** , 102–110 (2018). **This study demonstrates that motor timing can be carried out by controlling the speed at which neural trajectories evolve, which is reflected in the temporal scaling of single-unit responses. Recurrent neural networks trained to perform the same timing task also reach the same solution for controlling the speed at which population activity evolves** . 

44. Egger, S. W., Remington, E. D., Chang, C.-J. & Jazayeri, M. Internal models of sensorimotor integration regulate cortical dynamics. _Nat. Neurosci._ **22** , 1871–1882 (2019). 

45. Kim, J., Jung, A. H., Byun, J., Jo, S. & Jung, M. W. Inactivation of medial prefrontal cortex impairs time interval discrimination in rats. _Front. Behav. Neurosci._ **3** , 38 (2009). 

46. Merchant, H., Zarco, W., Pérez, O., Prado, L. & Bartolo, R. Measuring time with different neural chronometers during a synchronization-continuation task. _Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA_ **108** , 19784–19789 (2011). 

47. Gámez, J., Mendoza, G., Prado, L., Betancourt, A. & Merchant, H. The amplitude in periodic neural state trajectories underlies the tempo of rhythmic tapping. _PLoS Biol._ **17** , e3000054 (2019). 48. Crowe, D. A., Zarco, W., Bartolo, R. & Merchant, H. Dynamic representation of the temporal and sequential structure of rhythmic movements in the primate medial premotor cortex. _J. Neurosci._ **34** , 11972 (2014). 

49. Merchant, H. et al. Sensorimotor neural dynamics during isochronous tapping in the medial premotor cortex of the macaque. _Eur. J. Neurosci._ **41** , 586–602 (2015). 

50. Lewis, P. A. & Miall, R. C. Distinct systems for automatic and cognitively controlled time measurement: evidence from neuroimaging. _Curr. Opin. Neurobiol._ **13** , 250–255 (2003). 

51. Rammsayer, T. H. Neuropharmacological evidence for different timing mechanisms in humans. _Q. J. Exp. Psychol. B_ **52** , 273–286 (1999). 

52. Karmarkar, U. R. & Buonomano, D. V. Timing in the absence of clocks: encoding time in neural network states. _Neuron_ **53** , 427–438 (2007). 

**This study provides the first empirical evidence, in the form of behavioural results based on predictions from a state-dependent network, that timing may be carried out through non-metrical changes in neural population activity, as opposed to a dedicated internal clock** . 

NATure revIeWS **[|] NeuRoScieNce** 

volume 23[|] November 2022[|] **661** 

## Reviews 

53. Rammsayer, T. H. & Lima, S. D. Duration discrimination of filled and empty auditory intervals: cognitive and perceptual factors. _Percept. Psychophys._ **50** , 565–574 (1991). 

54. Spencer, R. M. C., Karmarkar, U. & Ivry, R. B. Evaluating dedicated and intrinsic models of temporal encoding by varying context. _Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B Biol. Sci._ **364** , 1853–1863 (2009). 

55. Rammsayer, T. H., Borter, N. & Troche, S. J. Visual-auditory differences in duration discrimination of intervals in the subsecond and second range. _Front. Psychol._ https://doi.org/10.3389/ fpsyg.2015.01626 (2015). 

56. Sohn, H., Narain, D., Meirhaeghe, N. & Jazayeri, M. Bayesian computation through cortical latent dynamics. _Neuron_ **103** , 934–947.e935 (2019). 

57. Shikano, Y., Ikegaya, Y. & Sasaki, T. Minute-encoding neurons in hippocampal-striatal circuits. _Curr. Biol._ https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2021.01.032 (2021). 

58. Jacobs, N. S., Allen, T. A., Nguyen, N. & Fortin, N. J. Critical role of the hippocampus in memory for elapsed time. _J. Neurosci._ **33** , 13888 (2013). 

59. Meck, W. H., Church, R. M. & Matell, M. S. Hippocampus, time, and memory–a retrospective analysis. _Behav. Neurosci._ **127** , 642–654 (2013). 

60. Palombo, D. J., Keane, M. M. & Verfaellie, M. Does the hippocampus keep track of time? _Hippocampus_ **26** , 372–379 (2016). 

61. Sabariego, M. et al. In the temporal organization of episodic memory, the hippocampus supports the experience of elapsed time. _Hippocampus_ **31** , 46–55 (2021). 

62. Narayanan, N. S. Ramping activity is a cortical mechanism of temporal control of action. _Curr. Opin. Behav. Sci._ **8** , 226–230 (2016). 

63. Komura, Y. et al. Retrospective and prospective coding for predicted reward in the sensory thalamus. _Nature_ **412** , 546–549 (2001). 

64. Parker, K. L., Alberico, S. L., Miller, A. D. & Narayanan, N. S. Prefrontal D1 dopamine signaling is necessary for temporal expectation during reaction time performance. _Neuroscience_ **255** , 246–254 (2013). 

65. Lebedev, M. A., O’Doherty, J. E. & Nicolelis, M. A. L. Decoding of temporal intervals from cortical ensemble activity. _J. Neurophysiol._ **99** , 166–186 (2008). 

66. Tanaka, M. Cognitive signals in the primate motor thalamus predict saccade timing. _J. Neurosci._ **27** , 12109 (2007). 

67. Jazayeri, M. & Shadlen, M. N. A neural mechanism for sensing and reproducing a time interval. _Curr. Biol._ **25** , 2599–2609 (2015). 

68. Kunimatsu, J., Suzuki, T. W., Ohmae, S. & Tanaka, M. Different contributions of preparatory activity in the basal ganglia and cerebellum for self-timing. _Elife_ **7** , e35676 (2018). 

69. Pastalkova, E., Itskov, V., Amarasingham, A. & Buzsáki, G. Internally generated cell assembly sequences in the rat hippocampus. _Science_ **321** , 1322–1327 (2008). 

   - **This article demonstrates sequential activity in the hippocampus which spans a delay period in which animals run in a fixed location** . 

70. MacDonald, C. J., Lepage, K. Q., Eden, U. T. & Eichenbaum, H. Hippocampal “time cells” bridge the gap in memory for discontiguous events. _Neuron_ **71** , 737–749 (2011). 

71. Jin, D. Z., Fujii, N. & Graybiel, A. M. Neural representation of time in cortico-basal ganglia circuits. _Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA_ **106** , 19156 (2009). 

72. Tiganj, Z., Jung, M. W., Kim, J. & Howard, M. W. Sequential firing codes for time in rodent medial prefrontal cortex. _Cereb. Cortex_ **27** , 5663–5671 (2017). 

73. Murakami, M., Vicente, M. I., Costa, G. M. & Mainen, Z. F. Neural antecedents of self-initiated actions in secondary motor cortex. _Nat. Neurosci._ **17** , 1574–1582 (2014). 

74. Namboodiri, V. M. K., Huertas, M. A., Monk, K. J., Shouval, H. Z. & Hussain Shuler, M. G. Visually cued action timing in the primary visual cortex. _Neuron_ **86** , 319–330 (2015). 

75. Shuler, M. G. & Bear, M. F. Reward timing in the primary visual cortex. _Science_ **311** , 1606 (2006). 

76. Matell, M. S., Meck, W. H. & Nicolelis, M. A. Interval timing and the encoding of signal duration by ensembles of cortical and striatal neurons. _Behav. Neurosci._ **117** , 760–773 (2003). 

77. Coull, J. T. & Nobre, A. C. Where and when to pay attention: the neural systems for directing attention 

to spatial locations and to time intervals as revealed by both PET and fMRI. _J. Neurosci._ **18** , 7426 (1998). **This study provides the first insights into the neural mechanisms for temporal expectation, demonstrating that a network of brain areas is involved in temporal expectation, and differs from the network of brain areas involved in spatial attention** . 

78. Nobre, A. C. & van Ede, F. Anticipated moments: temporal structure in attention. _Nat. Rev. Neurosci._ **19** , 34–48 (2018). 

79. Nobre, A. C., Correa, A. & Coull, J. T. The hazards of time. _Curr. Opin. Neurobiol._ **17** , 465–470 (2007). 

80. Miniussi, C., Wilding, E. L., Coull, J. T. & Nobre, A. C. Orienting attention in time. Modulation of brain potentials. _Brain_ **122** , 1507–1518 (1999). 

81. Carnevale, F., de Lafuente, V., Romo, R., Barak, O. & Parga, N. Dynamic control of response criterion in premotor cortex during perceptual detection under temporal uncertainty. _Neuron_ **86** , 1067–1077 (2015). **This study demonstrates neural trajectories evolving in a manner reflecting the influence of temporal expectation, with neural population activity moving closer to a decision threshold during the appropriate time window** . 

82. Ghose, G. M. & Maunsell, J. H. R. Attentional modulation in visual cortex depends on task timing. _Nature_ **419** , 616–620 (2002). 

**This study demonstrates that the activity of individual neurons can be modulated by temporal expectation, following the temporal structure of the hazard rate for when a target stimulus might occur** . 

83. Jaramillo, S. & Zador, A. M. The auditory cortex mediates the perceptual effects of acoustic temporal expectation. _Nat. Neurosci._ **14** , 246–251 (2011). 

84. Janssen, P. & Shadlen, M. N. A representation of the hazard rate of elapsed time in macaque area LIP. _Nat. Neurosci._ **8** , 234–241 (2005). 

85. Anderson, B. & Sheinberg, D. L. Effects of temporal context and temporal expectancy on neural activity in inferior temporal cortex. _Neuropsychologia_ **46** , 947–957 (2008). 

86. Toso, A., Reinartz, S., Pulecchi, F. & Diamond, M. E. Time coding in rat dorsolateral striatum. _Neuron_ **109** , 3663–3673.e3666 (2021). 

87. Kobak, D. et al. Demixed principal component analysis of neural population data. _Elife_ https://doi.org/10.7554/ eLife.10989 (2016). 

88. Umbach, G. et al. Time cells in the human hippocampus and entorhinal cortex support episodic memory. _Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA_ **117** , 28463 (2020). 

89. Kraus, B. J., Robinson, R. J. II, White, J. A., Eichenbaum, H. & Hasselmo, M. E. Hippocampal 

   - “time cells”: time versus path integration. _Neuron_ **78** , 1090–1101 (2013). 

90. MacDonald, C. J., Carrow, S., Place, R. & Eichenbaum, H. Distinct hippocampal time cell sequences represent odor memories in immobilized rats. _J. Neurosci._ **33** , 14607–14616 (2013). 

91. Cueva Christopher, J. et al. Low-dimensional dynamics for working memory and time encoding. _Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA_ **117** , 23021–23032 (2020). 

92. Koay, S. A., Charles, A. S., Thiberge, S. Y., Brody, C. D. & Tank, D. W. Sequential and efficient neural-population coding of complex task information. _Neuron_ **110** , 328–349.e311 (2022). 

93. Buzsáki, G. & Tingley, D. Space and time: the hippocampus as a sequence generator. _Trends Cogn. Sci._ 

   - **22** , 853–869 (2018). 

94. Kawai, R. et al. Motor cortex is required for learning but not for executing a motor skill. _Neuron_ **86** , 800–812 (2015). 

95. Heys, J. G. & Dombeck, D. A. Evidence for a subcircuit in medial entorhinal cortex representing elapsed time during immobility. _Nat. Neurosci._ **21** , 1574–1582 (2018). 

96. Heys, J. G., Wu, Z., Allegra Mascaro, A. L. & Dombeck, D. A. Inactivation of the medial entorhinal cortex selectively disrupts learning of interval timing. _Cell Rep._ **32** , 108163 (2020). 

97. Leong, Y. C., Radulescu, A., Daniel, R., DeWoskin, V. & Niv, Y. Dynamic interaction between reinforcement learning and attention in multidimensional environments. _Neuron_ **93** , 451–463 (2017). 

98. Radulescu, A., Niv, Y. & Ballard, I. Holistic reinforcement learning: the role of structure and attention. _Trends Cogn. Sci._ **23** , 278–292 (2019). 

99. Suh, J., Rivest, A. J., Nakashiba, T., Tominaga, T. & Tonegawa, S. Entorhinal cortex layer III input to the hippocampus is crucial for temporal association memory. _Science_ **334** , 1415–1420 (2011). 

100. Kitamura, T. et al. Island cells control temporal association memory. _Science_ **343** , 896–901 (2014). 

101. Polti, I., Nau, M., Kaplan, R., van Wassenhove, V. & Doeller, C. F. Rapid encoding of task regularities in the human hippocampus guides sensorimotor timing. _bioRxiv_ https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.08.03.454928 (2022). 

102. Taxidis, J. et al. Differential emergence and stability of sensory and temporal representations in context-specific hippocampal sequences. _Neuron_ https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2020.08.028 (2020). 

103. Buzsáki, G. & Llinás, R. Space and time in the brain. _Science_ **358** , 482 (2017). 

104. Remington, E. D., Narain, D., Hosseini, E. A. & Jazayeri, M. Flexible sensorimotor computations through rapid reconfiguration of cortical dynamics. _Neuron_ **98** , 1005–1019.e1005 (2018). 

105. Driscoll, L. N., Golub, M. D. & Sussillo, D. Computation through cortical dynamics. _Neuron_ **98** , 873–875 (2018). 

106. Monteiro, T. et al. Using temperature to analyse the neural basis of a latent temporal decision. _bioRxiv_ https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.24.251827 (2021). 

107. Cao, R., Bladon, J. H., Charczynski, S. J., Hasselmo, M. E. & Howard, M. W. Internally generated time in the rodent hippocampus is logarithmically compressed. _bioRxiv_ https://doi.org/ 10.1101/2021.10.25.465750 (2021). 

108. Genovesio, A., Tsujimoto, S. & Wise, S. P. Featureand order-based timing representations in the frontal cortex. _Neuron_ **63** , 254–266 (2009). 

109. Meck, W. H. & Church, R. M. Abstraction of temporal attributes. _J. Exp. Psychol. Anim. Behav. Process._ **8** , 226–243 (1982). 

110. Buonomano, D. V. A learning rule for the emergence of stable dynamics and timing in recurrent networks. _J. Neurophysiol._ **94** , 2275–2283 (2005). 

111. Liu, J. K. & Buonomano, D. V. Embedding multiple trajectories in simulated recurrent neural networks in a self-organizing manner. _J. Neurosci._ **29** , 13172 (2009). 

112. Itskov, V., Curto, C., Pastalkova, E. & Buzsáki, G. Cell assembly sequences arising from spike threshold adaptation keep track of time in the hippocampus. _J. Neurosci._ **31** , 2828 (2011). 

113. Rajan, K., Harvey, C. D. & Tank, D. W. Recurrent network models of sequence generation and memory. _Neuron_ **90** , 128–142 (2016). 

114. Goudar, V. & Buonomano, D. V. Encoding sensory and motor patterns as time-invariant trajectories in recurrent neural networks. _Elife_ https://doi.org/10.7554/ eLife.31134 (2018). 

115. Bi, Z. & Zhou, C. Understanding the computation of time using neural network models. _Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA_ **117** , 10530 (2020). 

116. Pérez, O. & Merchant, H. The synaptic properties of cells define the hallmarks of interval timing in a recurrent neural network. _J. Neurosci._ **38** , 4186 (2018). 

117. Hardy, N. F., Goudar, V., Romero-Sosa, J. L. & Buonomano, D. V. A model of temporal scaling correctly predicts that motor timing improves with speed. _Nat. Commun._ **9** , 4732 (2018). 

118. Laje, R. & Buonomano, D. V. Robust timing and motor patterns by taming chaos in recurrent neural networks. _Nat. Neurosci._ **16** , 925–933 (2013). **This study demonstrates that recurrent neural networks are able to generate stable trajectories capable of carrying out motor timing** . 

119. Goel, A. & Buonomano, D. V. Temporal interval learning in cortical cultures is encoded in intrinsic network dynamics. _Neuron_ **91** , 320–327 (2016). 

120. Johnson, H. A., Goel, A. & Buonomano, D. V. Neural dynamics of in vitro cortical networks reflects experienced temporal patterns. _Nat. Neurosci._ **13** , 917–919 (2010). 

121. Ahrens, M. B. & Sahani, M. Observers exploit stochastic models of sensory change to help judge the passage of time. _Curr. Biol._ **21** , 200–206 (2011). 

122. Buonomano, D. V. & Maass, W. State-dependent computations: spatiotemporal processing in cortical networks. _Nat. Rev. Neurosci._ **10** , 113–125 (2009). 

123. Buonomano, D. V. & Merzenich, M. M. Temporal information transformed into a spatial code by a neural network with realistic properties. _Science_ **267** , 1028–1030 (1995). 

124. Wiener, M., Turkeltaub, P. & Coslett, H. B. The image of time: a voxel-wise meta-analysis. _Neuroimage_ **49** , 1728–1740 (2010). 

**662**[|] November 2022[|] volume 23 

**www.nature.com/nrn** 

Reviews 

125. Coull, J. T., Cheng, R. K. & Meck, W. H. Neuroanatomical and neurochemical substrates of timing. _Neuropsychopharmacology_ **36** , 3–25 (2011). 

179. Friedman, W. J. Time in autobiographical memory. _Soc. Cogn._ **22** , 591–605 (2004). 

152. Paton, J. J. & Buonomano, D. V. The neural basis of timing: distributed mechanisms for diverse functions. _Neuron_ **98** , 687–705 (2018). 

   180. Shum, M. S. The role of temporal landmarks in autobiographical memory processes. _Psychol. Bull._ **124** , 423–442 (1998). 

126. Rao, S. M. et al. Distributed neural systems underlying the timing of movements. _J. Neurosci._ **17** , 5528 (1997). 

153. van Rijn, H., Gu, B. M. & Meck, W. H. Dedicated clock/timing-circuit theories of time perception and timed performance. _Adv. Exp. Med. Biol._ **829** , 75–99 (2014). 

   181. Friedman, W. J. The development of children’s memory for the time of past events. _Child. Dev._ **62** , 139–155 (1991). 

127. Coull, J. T., Vidal, F., Nazarian, B. & Macar, F. Functional anatomy of the attentional modulation of time estimation. _Science_ **303** , 1506–1508 (2004). 

154. Wiener, M., Matell, M. & Coslett, H. Multiple mechanisms for temporal processing. _Front. Integr. Neurosci._ https://doi.org/10.3389/fnint.2011.00031 (2011). 

   182. Friedman, W. J. in _Time, Action and Cognition: Towards Bridging the Gap: 66 (NATO Science Series D, 66)_ (eds. Macar, F., Pouthas, V. & Friedman, W. J.) 165–172 (Springer, 1992). 

128. Stevens, M. C., Kiehl, K. A., Pearlson, G. & Calhoun, V. D. Functional neural circuits for mental timekeeping. _Hum. Brain Mapp._ **28** , 394–408 (2007). 

155. Issa, J. B., Tocker, G., Hasselmo, M. E., Heys, J. G. & Dombeck, D. A. Navigating through time: a spatial navigation perspective on how the brain may encode time. _Annu. Rev. Neurosci._ https://doi.org/10.1146/ annurev-neuro-101419-011117 (2020). 

   183. Zacks, J. M. & Tversky, B. Event structure in perception and conception. _Psychol. Bull._ **127** , 3–21 (2001). 

129. Coull, J. T., Nazarian, B. & Vidal, F. Timing, storage, and comparison of stimulus duration engage discrete anatomical components of a perceptual timing network. _J. Cogn. Neurosci._ **20** , 2185–2197 (2008). 

      184. Zakay, D., Tsal, Y., Moses, M. & Shahar, I. The role of segmentation in prospective and retrospective time estimation processes. _Mem. Cogn._ **22** , 344–351 (1994). 

   156. Bausenhart, K. M., Bratzke, D. & Ulrich, R. Formation and representation of temporal reference information. _Curr. Opin. Behav. Sci._ **8** , 46–52 (2016). 

130. Harrington, D. L. et al. Neural representation of interval encoding and decision making. _Cogn. Brain Res._ **21** , 193–205 (2004). 

      185. Poynter, D. in _Time and Human Cognition: A Life-Span Perspective_ (eds. Levin, I. & Zakay, D.) 305–331 (North-Holland, 1989). 

   157. Savelli, F. & Knierim, J. J. Origin and role of path integration in the cognitive representations of the hippocampus: computational insights into open questions. _J. Exp. Biol._ **222** , jeb188912 (2019). 

131. Harrington, D. L., Zimbelman, J. L., Hinton, S. C. & Rao, S. M. Neural modulation of temporal encoding, maintenance, and decision processes. _Cereb. Cortex_ **20** , 1274–1285 (2010). 

132. Pouthas, V. et al. Neural network involved in time perception: an fMRI study comparing long and short interval estimation. _Hum. Brain Mapp._ **25** , 433–441 (2005). 

133. Rao, S. M., Mayer, A. R. & Harrington, D. L. The evolution of brain activation during temporal processing. _Nat. Neurosci._ **4** , 317–323 (2001). 

   186. Poynter, W. D. Duration judgment and the segmentation of experience. _Mem. Cogn._ **11** , 77–82 (1983). 

158. Friedman, W. J. Memory for the time of past events. _Psychol. Bull._ **113** , 44–66 (1993). 

   187. Poynter, W. D. & Homa, D. Duration judgment and the experience of change. _Percept. Psychophys._ **33** , 548–560 (1983). 

159. Ornstein, R. E. _On the Experience of Time_ (Penguin, 1969). 

188. Boltz, M. G. Effects of event structure on retrospective duration judgments. _Percept. Psychophys._ **57** , 1080–1096 (1995). 

160. Hicks, R. E., Miller, G. W. & Kinsbourne, M. Prospective and retrospective judgments of time as a function of amount of information processed. 

         189. Predebon, J. Organization of stimulus events and remembered apparent duration. _Aust. J. Psychol._ **36** , 161–169 (1984). 

      - _Am. J. Psychol._ **89** , 719–730 (1976). 

   161. Block, R. A. & Zakay, D. Prospective and retrospective duration judgments: a meta-analytic review. _Psychon. Bull. Rev._ **4** , 184–197 (1997). 

134. Emmons, E. et al. Temporal learning among prefrontal and striatal ensembles. _Cereb. Cortex Commun._ **1** , tgaa058 (2020). 

      190. Block, R. A. Temporal judgments and contextual change. _J. Exp. Psychol. Learn. Mem. Cogn._ **8** , 530–544 (1982). 

   162. Tobin, S., Bisson, N. & Grondin, S. An ecological approach to prospective and retrospective timing of long durations: a study involving gamers. _PLoS ONE_ **5** , e9271 (2010). 

135. Athalye, V. R., Carmena, J. M. & Costa, R. M. Neural reinforcement: re-entering and refining neural dynamics leading to desirable outcomes. _Curr. Opin. Neurobiol._ **60** , 145–154 (2020). 

|tgaa058 (2020).<br>135. Athalye, V. R., Carmena, J. M. & Costa, R. M.<br>|_Bull. Rev._ **4**, 184–197 (1997).<br>162. Tobin, S., Bisson, N. & Grondin, S. An ecological<br>|<br>change._J. Exp. Psychol. Learn. Mem. Cogn._ **8**,<br>530–544 (1982).|
|---|---|---|
|Neural reinforcement: re-entering and refining|approach to prospective and retrospective timing of|191. Block, R. A. Remembered duration: imagery processes|
|neural dynamics leading to desirable outcomes.|long durations: a study involving gamers._PLoS ONE_ **5**,|and contextual encoding._Acta Psychol._ **62**, 103–122|
|_Curr. Opin. Neurobiol._ **60**, 145–154 (2020).|e9271 (2010).|(1986).|
|136. Murray, J. M. & Escola, G. S. Learning multiple|163. Block, R. A., Hancock, P. A. & Zakay, D. How cognitive|192. Faber, M. & Gennari, S. P. In search of lost time:|
|variable-speed sequences in striatum via cortical|load affects duration judgments: a meta-analytic|reconstructing the unfolding of events from memory.|
|tutoring._Elife_ https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.26084|review._Acta Psychol._ **134**, 330–343 (2010).|_Cognition_ **143**, 193–202 (2015).|
|(2017).|164. Block, R. A. in_Time, Action and Cognition: Towards_|193. Block, R. A. & Reed, M. A. Remembered duration:|
|137. Meck, W. H. Neuropharmacology of timing and time|_Bridging the Gap: 66 (NATO Science Series D, 66)_|evidence for a contextual-change hypothesis.|
|perception._Brain Res. Cogn. Brain Res._ **3**, 227–242|(eds. Macar, F., Pouthas, V. & Friedman, W. J.)|_J. Exp. Psychol. Hum. Learn. Mem._ **4**, 656–665|
|(1996).|141–152 (Springer, 1992).|(1978).|
|138. Agostino, P. V. & Cheng, R.-K. Contributions of|165. Polti, I., Martin, B. & van Wassenhove, V. The effect|194. Kellaris, J. J. & Kent, R. J. The influence of music on|
|dopaminergic signaling to timing accuracy and|of attention and working memory on the estimation of|consumers’ temporal perceptions: Does time fly when|
|precision._Curr. Opin. Behav. Sci._ **8**, 153–160 (2016).|elapsed time._Sci. Rep._ **8**, 6690 (2018).|you’re having fun._J. Consum. Psychol._ **1**, 365–376|
|139. Maricq, A. V., Roberts, S. & Church, R. M.|166. Zakay, D. & Fallach, E. Immediate and remote time|(1992).|
|Methamphetamine and time estimation._J. Exp._|estimation — a comparison._Acta Psychol._ **57**, 69–81|195. Pollatos, O., Laubrock, J. & Wittmann, M. Interoceptive|
|_Psychol. Anim. Behav. Process._ **7**, 18–30 (1981).|(1984).|focus shapes the experience of time._PLoS ONE_ **9**,|
|140. Meck, W. H. Selective adjustment of the speed of|167. Grondin, S., Laflamme, V., Bisson, N. & Désautels, F.|e86934 (2014).|
|internal clock and memory processes._J. Exp. Psychol._|The delay before recall changes the remembered|196. Newtson, D. & Engquist, G. The perceptual|
|_Anim. Behav. Process._ **9**, 171–201 (1983).|duration of 15-minute video sequences._Appl. Cogn._|organization of ongoing behavior._J. Exp. Soc. Psychol._|
|141. Meck, W. H. Affinity for the dopamine D2 receptor|_Psychol._ **28**, 677–684 (2014).|**12**, 436–450 (1976).|
|predicts neuroleptic potency in decreasing the speed|168. Pedri, S. & Hesketh, B. Time perception: effects of task|197. Newtson, D., Engquist, G. A. & Bois, J. The objective|
|of an internal clock._Pharmacol. Biochem. Behav._ **25**,|speed and delay._Percept. Mot. Skills_ **76**, 599–608|basis of behavior units._J. Pers. Soc. Psychol._ **35**,|
|1185–1189 (1986).|(1993).|847–862 (1977).|
|142. Soares, S., Atallah, B. V. & Paton, J. J. Midbrain|169. Vitulli, W. F. & Crimmins, K. A. Immediate versus|198. Zacks, J. M. et al. Human brain activity time-locked|
|dopamine neurons control judgment of time._Science_|remote judgements: delay of response and rate|to perceptual event boundaries._Nat. Neurosci._ **4**,|
|**354**, 1273 (2016).|of stimulus presentation in time estimation.|651–655 (2001).|
|143. Howard, C. D., Li, H., Geddes, C. E. & Jin, X. Dynamic|_Percept. Mot. Skills_ **86**, 19–22 (1998).|**This study provides the first demonstration**|
|nigrostriatal dopamine biases action selection._Neuron_|170. Vitulli, W. F. & Shepard, H. A. Time estimation:|**of neural activity changes related to event**|
|**93**, 1436–1450.e1438 (2017).|effects of cognitive task, presentation rate, and delay.|**segmentation**.|
|144. Daw, N. D., Courville, A. C. & Touretzky, D. S.|_Percept. Mot. Skills_ **83**, 1387–1394 (1996).|199. Kurby, C. A. & Zacks, J. M. Segmentation in the|
|Representation and timing in theories of the dopamine|171. Loftus, E. F., Schooler, J. W., Boone, S. M. & Kline, D.|perception and memory of events._Trends Cogn. Sci._|
|system._Neural Comput._ **18**, 1637–1677 (2006).|Time went by so slowly: overestimation of event|**12**, 72–79 (2008).|
|145. Gershman, S. J., Moustafa, A. A. & Ludvig, E. A.|duration by males and females._Appl. Cogn. Psychol._|200. DuBrow, S. & Davachi, L. The influence of context|
|Time representation in reinforcement learning models|**1**, 3–13 (1987).|boundaries on memory for the sequential order|
|of the basal ganglia._Front. Comput. Neurosci._ **7**, 194|172. Brown, N. R. Organization of public events in|of events._J. Exp. Psychol. Gen._ **142**, 1277–1286|
|(2014).|long-term memory._J. Exp. Psychol. Gen._ **119**,|(2013).|
|146. Mikhael, J. G. & Gershman, S. J. Adapting the|297–314 (1990).|201. Horner, A. J., Bisby, J. A., Wang, A., Bogus, K. &|
|flow of time with dopamine._J. Neurophysiol._ **121**,|173. Burt, C. D. B. Reconstruction of the duration of|Burgess, N. The role of spatial boundaries in shaping|
|1748–1760 (2019).|autobiographical events._Mem. Cogn._ **20**, 124–132|long-term event representations._Cognition_ **154**,|
|147. Petter, E. A., Gershman, S. J. & Meck, W. H. Integrating|(1992).|151–164 (2016).|
|models of interval timing and reinforcement learning.|174. Burt, C. D. B. & Kemp, S. Retrospective duration|202. Sargent, J. Q. et al. Event segmentation ability|
|_Trends Cogn. Sci._ **22**, 911–922 (2018).|estimation of public events._Mem. Cogn._ **19**,|uniquely predicts event memory._Cognition_ **129**,|
|148. Meck, W. H. & Church, R. M. Cholinergic modulation|252–262 (1991).|241–255 (2013).|
|of the content of temporal memory._Behav. Neurosci._|175. Gibbons, J. A. & Thompson, C. P. Using a calendar|203. Swallow, K. M., Zacks, J. M. & Abrams, R. A. Event|
|**101**, 457–464 (1987).|in event dating._Appl. Cogn. Psychol._ **15**, 33–44|boundaries in perception affect memory encoding|
|149. Chubykin, A. A., Roach, E. B., Bear, M. F. &|(2001).|and updating._J. Exp. Psychol. Gen._ **138**, 236–257|
|Shuler, M. G. H. A cholinergic mechanism for reward|176. Larsen, S. F. & Thompson, C. P. Reconstructive|(2009).|
|timing within primary visual cortex._Neuron_ **77**,|memory in the dating of personal and public news|204. Gold, D. A., Zacks, J. M. & Flores, S. Effects of cues|
|723–735 (2013).|events._Mem. Cogn._ **23**, 780–790 (1995).|to event segmentation on subsequent memory.|
|150. Liu, C.-H. et al. Selective activation of a putative|177. Loftus, E. F. & Marburger, W. Since the eruption|_Cogn. Res. Princ. Implic._ **2**, 1 (2017).|
|reinforcement signal conditions cued interval timing|of Mt. St. Helens, has anyone beaten you up?|205. Flores, S., Bailey, H. R., Eisenberg, M. L. & Zacks, J. M.|
|in primary visual cortex._Curr. Biol._ **25**, 1551–1561|Improving the accuracy of retrospective reports|Event segmentation improves event memory up to one|
|(2015).|with landmarkevents._Mem. Cogn._ **11**, 114–120|month later._J. Exp. Psychol. Learn. Mem. Cogn._ **43**,|
|151. van Wassenhove, V., Herbst, S. K. & Kononowicz, T. W.|(1983).|1183–1202 (2017).|
|in_Magnetoencephalography: From Signals to Dynamic_|178. Yarmey, A. D. Retrospective duration estimations|206. Schwan, S. & Garsoffky, B. The cognitive representation|
|_Cortical Networks_(eds Selma S. & Cheryl J. A.)|for variant and invariant events in field situations.|of filmic event summaries._Appl. Cogn. Psychol._ **18**,|
|855–905 (Springer International Publishing, 2019).|_Appl. Cogn. Psychol._ **14**, 45–57 (2000).|37–55 (2004).|



136. Murray, J. M. & Escola, G. S. Learning multiple variable-speed sequences in striatum via cortical tutoring. _Elife_ https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.26084 (2017). 

NATure revIeWS **[|] NeuRoScieNce** 

volume 23[|] November 2022[|] **663** 

## Reviews 

207. DuBrow, S. & Davachi, L. Temporal binding within and across events. _Neurobiol. Learn. Mem._ **134** , 107–114 (2016). 208. Ezzyat, Y. & Davachi, L. What constitutes an episode in episodic memory? _Psychol. Sci._ **22** , 243–252 (2011). 

229. Clayton, N. S. & Dickinson, A. Episodic-like memory during cache recovery by scrub jays. _Nature_ **395** , 272–274 (1998). 

230. Fetterman, J. G. & Killeen, P. R. Prospective and retrospective timing by pigeons. _Learn. Behav._ **38** , 119–125 (2010). 231. Babb, S. J. & Crystal, J. D. Episodic-like memory in the . Babb, S. J. & Crystal, J. D. Episodic-like memory in the rat. _Curr. Biol._ **16** , 1317–1321 (2006). 232. Roberts, W. A. & Feeney, M. C. The comparative study of mental time travel. _Trends Cogn. Sci._ **13** , 271–277 (2009). 233. Wang, L. et al. Fallacious reversal of event-order during recall reveals memory reconstruction in rhesus monkeys. _Behav. Brain Res._ **394** , 112830 (2020). 234. Roberts, W. A. et al. Episodic-like memory in rats: is it based on when or how long ago? _Science_ **320** , 113 (2008). 235. Zhou, W. & Crystal, J. D. Evidence for remembering when events occurred in a rodent model of episodic memory. _Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA_ **106** , 9525 (2009). 

209. Ezzyat, Y. & Davachi, L. Similarity breeds proximity: pattern similarity within and across contexts is related to later mnemonic judgments of temporal proximity. _Neuron_ **81** , 1179–1189 (2014). 

210. Hsieh, L. T., Gruber, M. J., Jenkins, L. J. & Ranganath, C. Hippocampal activity patterns carry information about objects in temporal context. _Neuron_ **81** , 1165–1178 (2014). 

   231. Babb, S. J. & Crystal, J. D. Episodic-like memory in the . Babb, S. J. & Crystal, J. D. Episodic-like memory in the rat. _Curr. Biol._ **16** , 1317–1321 (2006). 

211. Clewett, D., DuBrow, S. & Davachi, L. Transcending time in the brain: how event memories are constructed from experience. _Hippocampus_ **29** , 162–183 (2019). 

212. Radvansky, G. A. & Zacks, J. M. Event boundaries in memory and cognition. _Curr. Opin. Behav. Sci._ **17** , 133–140 (2017). 

213. Baldassano, C. et al. Discovering event structure in continuous narrative perception and memory. _Neuron_ **95** , 709–721.e705 (2017). 

236. Diehl, G. W., Hon, O. J., Leutgeb, S. & Leutgeb, J. K. Stability of medial entorhinal cortex representations over time. _Hippocampus_ **29** , 284–302 (2019). 

**This study demonstrates that event segmentation occurs in a hierarchical manner across the brain, with early sensory areas segmenting events on short timescales and higher-order areas such as the hippocampus segmenting events on longer timescales which approximately correspond to the timescale of the perceived narrative structure of events** . 

237. Mankin, E. A., Diehl, G. W., Sparks, F. T., Leutgeb, S. & Leutgeb, J. K. Hippocampal CA2 activity patterns change over time to a larger extent than between spatial contexts. _Neuron_ **85** , 190–201 (2015). 

238. Mankin, E. A. et al. Neuronal code for extended time in the hippocampus. _Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA_ **109** , 19462 (2012). **This study demonstrates that the evolution of event trajectories can occur over the timescale of days and at different rates within the hippocampal subfields (CA1 and CA3)** . 

214. Hasson, U., Yang, E., Vallines, I., Heeger, D. J. & Rubin, N. A hierarchy of temporal receptive windows in human cortex. _J. Neurosci._ **28** , 2539 (2008). 

215. Lerner, Y., Honey, C. J., Silbert, L. J. & Hasson, U. Topographic mapping of a hierarchy of temporal receptive windows using a narrated story. _J. Neurosci._ **31** , 2906 (2011). 216. Zacks, J. M., Tversky, B. & Iyer, G. Perceiving, remembering, and communicating structure in events. _J. Exp. Psychol. Gen._ **130** , 29–58 (2001). 217. Bower, G. H. Stimulus-sampling theory of encoding variability. _Coding Process. Hum. Mem._ **3** , 85–123 (1972). 218. Estes, W. K. Statistical theory of distributional phenomena in learning. _Psychol. Rev._ **62** , 369–377 (1955). 219. Howard, M. W. & Kahana, M. J. A distributed representation of temporal context. _J. Math. Psychol._ **46** , 269–299 (2002). 220. Mensink, G.-J. & Raaijmakers, J. G. A model for interference and forgetting. _Psychol. Rev._ **95** , 434–455 (1988). 221. DuBrow, S., Rouhani, N., Niv, Y. & Norman, K. A. Does mental context drift or shift. _Curr. Opin. Behav. Sci._ **17** , 141–146 (2017). 

239. Mau, W. et al. The same hippocampal CA1 population simultaneously codes temporal information over multiple timescales. _Curr. Biol._ **28** , 1499–1508.e1494 (2018). 240. Rangel, L. M. et al. Temporally selective contextual encoding in the dentate gyrus of the hippocampus. _Nat. Commun._ **5** , 3181 (2014). 

241. Tsao, A. et al. Integrating time from experience in the lateral entorhinal cortex. _Nature_ **561** , 57–62 (2018). **This study demonstrates that event trajectories in the LEC evolve in a manner reflecting the content of ongoing experience, including learned temporal structures, and suggests that the LEC may play a central role in the generation of event trajectories** . 

242. Eichenbaum, H. On the integration of space, time, and memory. _Neuron_ **95** , 1007–1018 (2017). 

243. Moser, M.-B., Rowland, D. C. & Moser, E. I. Place cells, grid cells, and memory. _Cold Spring Harb. Perspect. Biol._ **7** , a021808 (2015). 

244. Buzsáki, G. & Moser, E. I. Memory, navigation and theta rhythm in the hippocampal-entorhinal system. _Nat. Neurosci._ **16** , 130–138 (2013). 

|||
|---|---|
|222. Rule, M. E., O’Leary, T. & Harvey, C. D. Causes and|_Nat. Neurosci._ **16**, 130–138 (2013).|
|consequences of representational drift._Curr. Opin._|245. Josselyn, S. A. & Tonegawa, S. Memory engrams:|
|_Neurobiol._ **58**, 141–147 (2019).|recalling the past and imagining the future._Science_|
|223. Jenkins, L. J. & Ranganath, C. Prefrontal and medial|**367**, eaaw4325 (2020).|
|temporal lobe activity at encoding predicts temporal|246. Jenkins, L. J. & Ranganath, C. Distinct neural|
|context memory._J. Neurosci._ **30**, 15558–15565|mechanisms for remembering when an event|
|(2010).|occurred._Hippocampus_ **26**, 554–559 (2016).|
|**This study provides the first link between evolution**|247. Montchal, M. E., Reagh, Z. M. & Yassa, M. A. Precise|
|**of event trajectories and estimation of temporal**|temporal memories are supported by the lateral|
|**distance in humans, demonstrating that when the**|entorhinal cortex in humans._Nat. Neurosci._ **22**,|
|**neural activity patterns for different objects within**|284–288 (2019).|
|**an overall sequence of objects were more distinct**|248. Hainmueller, T. & Bartos, M. Parallel emergence|
|**from each other, estimates for when a specific**|of stable and dynamic memory engrams in the|
|**object was shown were more accurate**.|hippocampus._Nature_ **558**, 292–296 (2018).|
|224. Nielson, D. M., Smith, T. A., Sreekumar, V., Dennis, S.|249. Hyman, J. M., Ma, L., Balaguer-Ballester, E.,|
|& Sederberg, P. B. Human hippocampus represents|Durstewitz, D. & Seamans, J. K. Contextual encoding|
|space and time during retrieval of real-world memories.|by ensembles of medial prefrontal cortex neurons.|
|_Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA_ **112**, 11078 (2015).|_Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA_ **109**, 5086 (2012).|
|225. Lositsky, O. et al. Neural pattern change during|250. Ziv, Y. et al. Long-term dynamics of CA1 hippocampal|
|encoding of a narrative predicts retrospective duration|place codes._Nat. Neurosci._ **16**, 264–266 (2013).|
|estimates._Elife_ **5**, e16070 (2016).|251. Cappaert, N. L. M., van Strien, N. M. & Witter, M. P.|
|**This study experimentally demonstrates that**|Hippocampal formation. in_The Rat Nervous System_,|
|**changes in neural activity patterns measured using**|511–573 (Academic Press, 2015).|
|**functional MRI — particularly in the entorhinal**|252. Speer, N. K., Zacks, J. M. & Reynolds, J. R. Human|
|**cortex — are correlated with retrospective duration**|brain activity time-locked to narrative event|
|**estimates**.|boundaries._Psychol. Sci._ **18**, 449–455 (2007).|
|226. Block, R. A. & Zakay, D. in_Time and Mind_|253. Ben-Yakov, A., Eshel, N. & Dudai, Y. Hippocampal|
|(ed. Helfrich, H.) Ch. 9, 171–195 (Hogrefe & Huber,|immediate poststimulus activity in the encoding of|
|1996).|consecutive naturalistic episodes._J. Exp. Psychol. Gen._|
|227. Fountas, Z. et al. A predictive processing model of|**142**, 1255–1263 (2013).|
|episodic memory and time perception._Neural Comput._|254. Magliano, J. P. & Zacks, J. M. The impact of continuity|
|**34**, 1501–1544 (2022).|editing in narrative film on event segmentation.|
|228. Roseboom, W. et al. Activity in perceptual classification|_Cogn. Sci._ **35**, 1489–1517 (2011).|
|networks as a basis for human subjective time|255. Bulkin, D. A., Sinclair, D. G., Law, L. M. & Smith, D. M.|
|perception._Nat. Commun._ **10**, 267 (2019).|Hippocampal state transitions at the boundaries|



- between trial epochs. _Hippocampus_ **30** , 582–595 (2020). 

- 256. Zheng, J. et al. Neurons detect cognitive boundaries to structure episodic memories in humans. _Nat. Neurosci._ **25** , 358–368 (2022). **This study demonstrates in humans that single cells can encode event boundaries, that the evolution of event trajectories is influenced by event boundaries, and that both the activity of cells encoding event boundaries and the dynamics of event trajectories are each correlated with discrimination of temporal order** . 

257. Bladon, J. H., Sheehan, D. J., De Freitas, C. S. & Howard, M. W. In a temporally segmented experience hippocampal neurons represent temporally drifting context but not discrete segments. _J. Neurosci._ **39** , 6936 (2019). 

258. Sun, C., Yang, W., Martin, J. & Tonegawa, S. Hippocampal neurons represent events as transferable units of experience. _Nat. Neurosci._ **23** , 651–663 (2020). 

259. Reynolds, J. R., Zacks, J. M. & Braver, T. S. A computational model of event segmentation from perceptual prediction. _Cogn. Sci._ **31** , 613–643 (2007). 

260. Zacks, J. M., Speer, N. K., Swallow, K. M., Braver, T. S. & Reynolds, J. R. Event perception: a mind-brain perspective. _Psychol. Bull._ **133** , 273–293 (2007). 

261. Schapiro, A. C., Rogers, T. T., Cordova, N. I., Turk-Browne, N. B. & Botvinick, M. M. Neural representations of events arise from temporal community structure. _Nat. Neurosci._ **16** , 486–492 (2013). 

262. Clewett, D. & Davachi, L. The ebb and flow of experience determines the temporal structure of memory. _Curr. Opin. Behav. Sci._ **17** , 186–193 (2017). 

263. Hasson, U., Chen, J. & Honey, C. J. Hierarchical process memory: memory as an integral component of information processing. _Trends Cogn. Sci._ **19** , 304–313 (2015). 

264. Knierim, J. J., Neunuebel, J. P. & Deshmukh, S. S. Functional correlates of the lateral and medial entorhinal cortex: objects, path integration and local-global reference frames. _Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B Biol. Sci._ **369** , 20130369 (2013). 

265. Bota, M., Sporns, O. & Swanson, L. W. Architecture of the cerebral cortical association connectome underlying cognition. _Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. Usa._ **112** , E2093–E2101 (2015). 

266. Burwell, R. D. & Amaral, D. G. Cortical afferents of the perirhinal, postrhinal, and entorhinal cortices of the rat. _J. Comp. Neurol._ **398** , 179–205 (1998). 

267. Doan, T. P., Lagartos-Donate, M. J., Nilssen, E. S., Ohara, S. & Witter, M. P. Convergent projections from perirhinal and postrhinal cortices suggest a multisensory nature of lateral, but not medial, entorhinal cortex. _Cell Rep._ **29** , 617–627.e617 (2019). 

268. Zingg, B. et al. Neural networks of the mouse neocortex. _Cell_ **156** , 1096–1111 (2014). 

269. Burwell, R. D. The parahippocampal region: corticocortical connectivity. _Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci._ **911** , 25–42 (2000). 

270. Nilssen, E. S., Doan, T. P., Nigro, M. J., Ohara, S. & Witter, M. P. Neurons and networks in the entorhinal cortex: A reappraisal of the lateral and medial entorhinal subdivisions mediating parallel cortical pathways. _Hippocampus_ **29** , 1238–1254 (2019). 

271. Deshmukh, S. S. & Knierim, J. J. Representation of non-spatial and spatial information in the lateral entorhinal cortex. _Front. Behav. Neurosci._ **5** , 69–69 (2011). 

272. Hargreaves, E. L., Rao, G., Lee, I. & Knierim, J. J. Major dissociation between medial and lateral entorhinal input to dorsal hippocampus. _Science_ **308** , 1792–1794 (2005). 

273. Igarashi, K. M., Lu, L., Colgin, L. L., Moser, M.-B. & Moser, E. I. Coordination of entorhinal–hippocampal ensemble activity during associative learning. _Nature_ **510** , 143–147 (2014). 

274. Keene, C. S. et al. Complementary functional organization of neuronal activity patterns in the perirhinal, lateral entorhinal, and medial entorhinal cortices. _J. Neurosci._ **36** , 3660–3675 (2016). 

275. Leitner, F. C. et al. Spatially segregated feedforward and feedback neurons support differential odor processing in the lateral entorhinal cortex. _Nat. Neurosci._ **19** , 935–944 (2016). 

276. Pilkiw, M. et al. Phasic and tonic neuron ensemble codes for stimulus-environment conjunctions in the lateral entorhinal cortex. _Elife_ https://doi.org/ 10.7554/eLife.28611 (2017). 

**664**[|] November 2022[|] volume 23 

**www.nature.com/nrn** 

Reviews 

277. Tsao, A., Moser, M. B. & Moser, E. I. Traces of experience in the lateral entorhinal cortex. _Curr. Biol._ **23** , 399–405 (2013). 278. Yoganarasimha, D., Rao, G. & Knierim, J. J. Lateral entorhinal neurons are not spatially selective in cue-rich environments. _Hippocampus_ **21** , 1363–1374 (2011). 279. Bitzenhofer, S. H., Westeinde, E. A., Zhang, H. B. & Isaacson, J. S. Rapid odor processing by layer 2 subcircuits in lateral entorhinal cortex. _Elife_ https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.75065 (2022). 280. Lee, J. Y. et al. Dopamine facilitates associative memory encoding in the entorhinal cortex. _Nature_ **598** , 321–326 (2021). 281. Suter, E. E., Weiss, C. & Disterhoft, J. F. Differential responsivity of neurons in perirhinal cortex, lateral entorhinal cortex, and dentate gyrus during time-bridging learning. _Hippocampus_ **29** , 511–526 (2019). 282. Wang, C. et al. Egocentric coding of external items in the lateral entorhinal cortex. _Science_ **362** , 945 (2018). 283. Knierim, J. J. & Neunuebel, J. P. Tracking the flow of hippocampal computation: pattern separation, pattern completion, and attractor dynamics. _Neurobiol. Learn. Mem._ **129** , 38–49 (2016). 284. Ben-Yakov, A. & Henson, R. N. The hippocampal film editor: sensitivity and specificity to event boundaries in continuous experience. _J. Neurosci._ **38** , 10057–10068 (2018). 285. Sols, I., DuBrow, S., Davachi, L. & Fuentemilla, L. Event boundaries trigger rapid memory reinstatement of the prior events to promote their representation in long-term memory. _Curr. Biol._ **27** , 3499–3504.e3494 (2017). 286. Silva, M., Baldassano, C. & Fuentemilla, L. Rapid memory reactivation at movie event boundaries promotes episodic encoding. _J. Neurosci._ **39** , 8538 (2019). 287. Tambini, A. & Davachi, L. Awake reactivation of prior experiences consolidates memories and biases cognition. _Trends Cogn. Sci._ **23** , 876–890 (2019). 288. Carr, M. F., Jadhav, S. P. & Frank, L. M. Hippocampal replay in the awake state: a potential substrate for memory consolidation and retrieval. _Nat. Neurosci._ **14** , 147–153 (2011). 289. Folkerts, S., Rutishauser, U. & Howard, M. W. Human episodic memory retrieval is accompanied by a neural contiguity effect. _J. Neurosci._ **38** , 4200–4211 (2018). 290. Gelbard-Sagiv, H., Mukamel, R., Harel, M., Malach, R. & Fried, I. Internally generated reactivation of single neurons in human hippocampus during free recall. _Science_ **322** , 96 (2008). 291. Howard, M. W., Viskontas, I. V., Shankar, K. H. & Fried, I. Ensembles of human MTL neurons “jump back in time” in response to a repeated stimulus. _Hippocampus_ **22** , 1833–1847 (2012). 292. Manning, J. R., Polyn, S. M., Baltuch, G. H., Litt, B. & Kahana, M. J. Oscillatory patterns in temporal lobe reveal context reinstatement during memory search. _Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA_ **108** , 12893 (2011). 293. Miller, J. F. et al. Neural activity in human hippocampal formation reveals the spatial context of retrieved memories. _Science_ **342** , 1111 (2013). 294. Rubin, A., Geva, N., Sheintuch, L. & Ziv, Y. Hippocampal ensemble dynamics timestamp events in long-term memory. _Elife_ **4** , e12247 (2015). 295. Block, R. Models of psychological time. in _Cognitive Models of Psychological Time_ (Ed. Block, R. A.) 1–35 (Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 1990). 296. Howard, M. W. in _The New Handbook of Mathematical Psychology_ (eds. Ashby,F. G., Colonius,H. & Dzhafarov, E.) Vol. 3 (Cambridge Univ. Press, in the press). 297. Howard, M. W., Shankar, K. H., Aue, W. R. & Criss, A. H. A distributed representation of internal time. _Psychol. Rev._ **122** , 24–53 (2015). 298. Shankar, K. H. & Howard, M. W. A scale-invariant internal representation of time. _Neural Comput._ **24** , 134–193 (2012). 299. Howard, M. W. et al. A unified mathematical framework for coding time, space, and sequences in the hippocampal region. _J. Neurosci._ **34** , 4692–4707 (2014). **This study describes a biologically plausible computational model which in principle is capable of carrying out retrospective timing** . 

300. Engel, T. A. & Wang, X.-J. Same or different? A neural circuit mechanism of similarity-based pattern match decision making. _J. Neurosci._ **31** , 6982 (2011). 

301. Bright, I. M. et al. A temporal record of the past with a spectrum of time constants in the monkey entorhinal cortex. _Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA_ **117** , 20274 (2020). 

302. Thavabalasingam, S., O’Neil, E. B. & Lee, A. C. H. Multivoxel pattern similarity suggests the integration of temporal duration in hippocampal event sequence representations. _Neuroimage_ **178** , 136–146 (2018). 

303. Thavabalasingam, S., O’Neil, E. B., Tay, J., Nestor, A. & Lee, A. C. H. Evidence for the incorporation of temporal duration information in human hippocampal long-term memory sequence representations. 

- _Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA_ **116** , 6407–6414 (2019). 

- 304. Foudil, S.-A., Kwok, S. C. & Macaluso, E. Context-dependent coding of temporal distance between cinematic events in the human precuneus. 

_J. Neurosci._ **40** , 2129 (2020). 

305. Kwok, S. C., Shallice, T. & Macaluso, E. Functional anatomy of temporal organisation and domain-specificity of episodic memory retrieval. _Neuropsychologia_ **50** , 2943–2955 (2012). 

306. Cohn-Sheehy, B. I. et al. The hippocampus constructs narrative memories across distant events. _Curr. Biol._ 

   - **31** , 4935–4945.e4937 (2021). 

307. Azizi, L., Polti, I. & van Wassenhove, V. Episodic timing: how spontaneous alpha clocks, retrospectively. _bioRxiv_ https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.10.01.462732 (2021). 

308. Cohn-Sheehy, B. I. & Ranganath, C. Time regained: how the human brain constructs memory for time. _Curr. Opin. Behav. Sci._ **17** , 169–177 (2017). 

309. Davachi, L. & DuBrow, S. How the hippocampus preserves order: the role of prediction and context. _Trends Cogn. Sci._ **19** , 92–99 (2015). 

310. Ranganath, C. & Hsieh, L.-T. The hippocampus: a special place for time. _Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci._ **1369** , 93–110 (2016). 

311. Tulving, E. _Elements of Episodic Memory_ (Oxford University Press, 1983). 

312. DuBrow, S. & Davachi, L. Temporal memory is shaped by encoding stability and intervening item reactivation. _J. Neurosci._ **34** , 13998 (2014). 

313. Hsieh, L.-T. & Ranganath, C. Cortical and subcortical contributions to sequence retrieval: Schematic coding of temporal context in the neocortical recollection network. _NeuroImage_ **121** , 78–90 (2015). 

314. Manns, J. R., Howard, M. W. & Eichenbaum, H. Gradual changes in hippocampal activity support remembering the order of events. _Neuron_ **56** , 530–540 (2007). 

**This study provides the first experimental observation of evolving event trajectories in the hippocampus, and demonstrates a correlation between the rate of drift and accuracy in determining temporal order of events** . 

315. Cox, B. M. et al. Acquisition of temporal order requires an intact CA3 commissural/associational (C/A) feedback system in mice. _Commun. Biol._ **2** , 251 (2019). 

316. Aronov, D., Nevers, R. & Tank, D. W. Mapping of a non-spatial dimension by the hippocampal–entorhinal circuit. _Nature_ **543** , 719–722 (2017). 

317. Terada, S., Sakurai, Y., Nakahara, H. & Fujisawa, S. Temporal and rate coding for discrete event sequences in the hippocampus. _Neuron_ **94** , 1248–1262.e1244 (2017). 

318. Allen, T. A., Salz, D. M., McKenzie, S. & Fortin, N. J. Nonspatial sequence coding in CA1 neurons. 

   - _J. Neurosci._ **36** , 1547–1563 (2016). 

319. Shahbaba, B. et al. Hippocampal ensembles represent sequential relationships among an extended sequence of nonspatial events. _Nat. Commun._ **13** , 787 (2022). 

320. Schuck, N. W. & Niv, Y. Sequential replay of nonspatial task states in the human hippocampus. _Science_ **364** , eaaw5181 (2019). 

321. Coull, J. T. & Droit-Volet, S. Explicit understanding of duration develops implicitly through action. _Trends Cogn. Sci._ **22** , 923–937 (2018). 

322. Faber, M. & Gennari, S. P. Effects of learned episodic event structure on prospective duration judgments. 

- _J. Exp. Psychol. Learn. Mem. Cogn._ **43** , 1203 (2017). 

- 323. Bellmund, J. L., Deuker, L. & Doeller, C. F. Mapping sequence structure in the human lateral entorhinal cortex. _Elife_ **8** , e45333 (2019). 

324. Zauberman, G., Levav, J., Diehl, K. & Bhargave, R. 1995 feels so close yet so far: the effect of event 

- markers on subjective feelings of elapsed time. _Psychol. Sci._ **21** , 133–139 (2010). 

- 325. Baldassano, C., Hasson, U. & Norman, K. A. Representation of real-world event schemas during narrative perception. _J. Neurosci._ https://doi.org/ 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0251-18.2018 (2018). 

326. Morton, N. W., Schlichting, M. L. & Preston, A. R. Representations of common event structure in medial temporal lobe and frontoparietal cortex support efficient inference. _Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA_ https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1912338117 (2020). 

327. Pudhiyidath, A., Roome, H. E., Coughlin, C., Nguyen, K. V. & Preston, A. R. Developmental differences in temporal schema acquisition impact reasoning decisions. _Cogn. Neuropsychol._ **37** , 25–45 (2020). 

328. Roach, N. W., McGraw, P. V., Whitaker, D. J. & Heron, J. Generalization of prior information for rapid Bayesian time estimation. _Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA_ **114** , 412 (2017). 

329. Bellmund, J. L. S., Deuker, L., Montijn, N. D. & Doeller, C. F. Structuring time: The hippocampus constructs sequence memories that generalize temporal relations across experiences. _bioRxiv_ https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.23.440002 (2021). 

330. Gauthier, B., Pestke, K. & van Wassenhove, V. Building the arrow of time… over time: a sequence of brain activity mapping imagined events in time and space. _Cereb. Cortex_ **29** , 4398–4414 (2019). 

331. Gauthier, B., Prabhu, P., Kotegar, K. A. & van Wassenhove, V. Hippocampal contribution to ordinal psychological time in the human brain. _J. Cogn. Neurosci._ **32** , 2071–2086 (2020). 

332. Gauthier, B. & van Wassenhove, V. Cognitive mapping in mental time travel and mental space navigation. _Cognition_ **154** , 55–68 (2016). 

333. Lee, C. S., Aly, M. & Baldassano, C. Anticipation of temporally structured events in the brain. _Elife_ https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.64972 (2021). 

334. Block, R. A., Grondin, S. & Zakay, D. in _Timing and Time Perception: Procedures, Measures & Applications_ (eds Vatakis, A., Balcı, F., Di Luca, M. & Correa, Á.) 32–51 (Brill, 2018). 

335. Block, R. A. Memory and the experience of duration in retrospect. _Mem. Cogn._ **2** , 153–160 (1974). 

## **Acknowledgements** 

The authors dedicate this Review to the memory of Warren H. Meck. Sadly, Warren passed away in 2020 before they could complete the writing of this Review. However, it was first proposed by him as an opportunity to bring together two fields of time research which have long been isolated from each other, and the authors are honoured and grateful to continue this work in his memory. The authors thank V. van Wassenhove for discussion and comments on the manuscript. The work was supported by a Synergy Grant from the European Research Council to E.I.M. (‘KILONEURONS’, grant agreement number 951319), an RCN FRIPRO grant to E.I.M. (grant number 286225), a Centre of Excellence scheme grant to M.-B.M. and E.I.M. from the Research Council of Norway (Centre for Neural Computation, grant number 223262), the Kavli Foundation (M.-B.M. and E.I.M.), and a direct contribution to M.-B.M. and E.I.M. from the Ministry of Education and Research of Norway. 

## **Author contributions** 

All authors contributed to the manuscript. 

## **Competing interests** 

The authors declare no competing financial interests. 

## **Peer review information** 

_Nature Reviews Neuroscience_ thanks Y.-J. Lin and the other anonymous reviewers for their contribution to the peer review of this work. 

## **Publisher’s note** 

Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations. 

Springer Nature or its licensor holds exclusive rights to this article under a publishing agreement with the author(s) or other rightsholder(s); author self-archiving of the accepted manuscript version of this article is solely governed by the terms of such publishing agreement and applicable law. 

© Springer Nature Limited 2022 

NATure revIeWS **[|] NeuRoScieNce** 

volume 23[|] November 2022[|] **665** 

